








Fundamental  Equations


inger equation:











2/»





Time  dependence  of  an expectation  value:



Generalized  uncertainty  princiDle:



Heisenberg  uncertainty  principle:


Canonical  commutator:








Pauli  iiiatrices:

"           1     0               "’            i       0                 w-  =      0    — 1





Planck's  constant:             h            1.05457  x  10*'" I s

Speed  of  light:                    c    =     2.99792  x  10   m/s


Mass  of proton:               md     =      1.67262  x  l0*'⁷  kg


Charge  of  proton: arge  o   eiec
e             1.60218  x  10*" C
Permittivity  of  space:       ro    =      8.85419  x  10*'-  C²/I m
Boltzmann  constant:       kB    ——    1.38065  x  10‘2" J/K







Fine structure constant:         a            empire
Bohr  radius:                                  =

Bohr energies:                        E„


Binding•  energy:                    — E


Ground  state:


Rydberg  formula:
=      1/ 137.036

=      5.29177  x  10* '    m


(it       l,  2, 3, .   . )


=      13.6057  eV



Rydberg  constant:
E
R    ——     —

=      1.09737  x  107  /m










uan um      ec  anics



David J.  Griffiths
















Edit‹ir-ill-Chiel’.  Science:  John  Challice Senior  Edi1t›r:  Erik  Falalgren

Editori.il  Assistant:  Andrew  Sobel
Vicc  Pi‘esidcnt  and  Director  of’ Production  and  M‹inul•acturing. ESM:  David  W. Riccardi 
Production  Editt›i .  Beth  Lew
Director  of  Creative  Services:  Paul  Belfanti

Cover  Designer:  Bruce  Kensclaar
Managing  Editor,  AV  Management  and  Production:  Patricia  Burns Art  Editor:  Abigail  Bass
Manufacturing  Manager:  Trudy  Pisciotti Manuf‹tcturing  Buyer:  Lynda  Castillo
Executive  Marketing  Manager:  Mark  Ptaltzgrafi‘


O  2-00fi.  199'i  Peai'son  Education.  Inc. Pearson  Prentice  Hall
Pearson  Education,  Jnc.
Upycr  Saddle  Rivcr,  NJ  (}7438

All rights  reserved,  No  part  oi’ this  book  hay  bc  reproduced  in  any  li›rm or  by  :iuy  
means.  without permission  in  writing  fr‹im  the  publisher.

Pcarson  I'rentice  Mall      is  a  ti’adcnJa‹ k  ct”  Pearsr›n  EdUñilfiOll.  lnC. Pi inted  in  
the  United  State.s  of  Anger ic:i
0  9  8  7


It” you  purchascd  this  bcok  within  thc  Omited  States  or  Canada  you  shculd  be  aware  
that  it  Isa»  bccn wrci\g1ulIy  imported  without  the  approval  of” the  Publishei   or  \hc  
Authot.

Peril son  Education  LTD..  L›iirfr›zi
Peiirson  Education  Australia  Pty.  Ltd.. SJ'diiry Pcarson  Education  Singapore.  Pte. Ltd.
Pearson  Education  North  Asia Lld.. H ›n,g  Knng Pearson  Education  Canada,  Inc.. Tnroitto 
Pearson  Educacifin  de  Mexico.  S.A.  dc  C.V. Pearson  Education—Japan. Tnks,n
Pearson  Education  Maliiysia.  Pte.  Ltd.
Pearson  Education.  Upper  Saddle  River,  New  Jersey












CONThNTS






PART I     THEORY
1    THE  WAVE  FI INATION  1
1.1      The Schrodinger  Equation  1
1.2      The Statistical  Interpretation  2

1.4      Normalization   12
1.5      Momentum  15


2    TIME-INDEPENDENT SCHRODINGER  EQUATION  24 ionary     ates

2.3       The  Haiiiionic  Oscillator  40
2.4      The  Free Particle
2 5       The  Dell a-Function  Potentlal   6e
2.6      The Finite  Square Well  75





age
3.1      Hilbert  Space  93
3.2      Observables  96
igen  u i    o  s o


ian    per   or

’iv          COnteists

3.4      Generalized  Statistical Interpretation  106
3.5      The  Uncertainty  Principle  110
3.6      Dirac  Notation  118
4    QUANTUM  MECHANICS  IN THREE DIMENSIONS  131
4.1      Schrodinger  Equation  in Spherical  Coordinates  131
4.2      The  Hydrogen  Atom   145
4.3      Angular Momentum  160
4.4      Spin  17

5    IDENTICAL  PARTICLES  201
5.1      Two-Particle  Systems  201
5.2      Atoms  210
5.3      Solids  218
5.4      Quantum Statistical  Mechanics  230

PART II     APPLICATIONS
6    TIME-INDEPENDENT PERTURBATION  THEORY  249
6.1      Nondep•enerate Perturbation  Theory  249
6.2      Dep•enerate  Perturbation  Theory  257
6.3      The Fine Structure of Hydrog•en  266
6.4     The Zeeman  Effect  277
6.5      Hyperfine  Splitting  283
7    THE VARIATIONAL  PRINCIPLE  293
7.1      Theory  293
7.2      The Ground  State of  Helium  299
7.3      The Hydrop•en Molecule  Ion  304


8.2      Tunneling  320
8.3      The Connection  Formulas  325
9    TIME-DEPENDENT PERTURBATION  THEORY  340
9.1      Two-Level  Systems  341
9.2      Emission  and  Absorption  of  Radiation  348
9.3      Spontaneous  Emission  355
10    THE ADIABATIC  APPROXIMATION  368
10.1    The Adiabatic Theorem  368
10.2    Berry's  Phase  376



11   SCATTERING  394
11.1    Introduction  394
11.2    Partial Wave  Analysis  399
11.3    Phase Shifts  405
11.4    The Born  Approximation   408

12    AFTERWORD  420
12.1    The  EPR  Paradox  421

12.3    The  No-Clone Theorem  428
12.4    Schrodinger's  Cat  430
12.5    The Quantum Zeno Paradox  431

APPENDIX    LINEAR  ALGEBRA  435
A.1    Vectors  435

A.3    Matrices  441
A.4    Changing  Bases  446
A.5    Eigenvectors  and  Eigenvalues  449
A.6    Hermitian  Transformations  455 INDEX  459












PREFACE




Unlike Newton's mechanics, or Maxwell's electrodynamics, or Einstein's relativity,

ual,  and  it  retains  to  this  day  some  of  the scars  of  its exhilarating  but  traumatic 
youth. There is no general consensus as to what its fundamental  principles are, how i  s  o        
e taug     or w  at  t rea  y      e             ery co   pe ent p  ys cis  can     o quantum  
mechanics,  but the stories  we tell ourselves about  what  we are doing are as various as the 
tales of Scheherazade, and almost as implausible.  Niels Bohr said, “If  you  are  not  confused  
by  quantum  physics  then  you  haven't  really  understood it”; RiChard  Feynnian reniarkcd,  “I 
think I can safcly say  that  nobody  understands uantum  mechanics.’
The purpose of this book is to teach you how to do quantum mechanics. Apart from some essential 
background  in Chapter 1, the deeper quasi-philosophical ques-
belt
quantum  mechanics  tiieniis  until  one  has  a  firm  sense  of  what  quantum  mechan- ics  
does.  But  if  you  absolutely  cannot  wait,  by  all  means  read  the  Afterword

Not  only  is quantum  theory  conceptually  rich, it  ls  also  technically  difficult, and exact 
solutions  to all but the most artificial  textbook examples are few and far between.  Il is 
therefore  essential  to develop special  techniques  for attacking nlore realistic problem.s.  
Accordingly,  this book  is divided  into two parts;'  Part I covers the basic  theory, and  Part 
II assembles an arsenal  of approximation  schemes, with illustrative  applications.  Althoup•h  it 
 is important  to  keep  the  two  parts  logi‹oll y



3rd ed..  McGraw-Hill,  New  York  ( 1992).

viii         Pre/oce


immediately  after Chapter 2.
This  book  is  intended  for  a  one-semester  or one-year  course  at  the  junior  or senior  
level.  A  one-semester  course  will  have  to  concentrate  mainly  on  Part  I; a  full-vear  
course  should  have  room  fnr  sunnlernentnrv  material   hevnnd  Pnrt  II. The  reader  must  be 
 familiar  with  the  rudiments  of  linear  algebra  (as  summarized in  the  Appendix),  complex  
numbers,  and  calculus  up  through  partial  derivatives; some  acquaintance  with  Fourier  
analysis  and  the Dirac  delta  function  would  help. Elementary  classical  mechanics  is 
essential,  of course,  and  a little electrodynaiiiics would  be  useful  in  places.  As  always, 
 the  more  physics  and  math  you  know  the
cotuci  i \  wJii  us,  aJiu  the  mule  yuu  wii‹  gci  uui  ul  yuui  >iuuy.     ui  1  wuuJu  
iik to  emphasize  that  quantum  mechanics  is  not,  in  my  view,  something   that  flows 
smoothly   and  naturally   from  earlier  theories.   On  the  contrary,  it  represents  an 
abrupt  and revolutionary  departure  from classical  ideas,  calling  forth  a wholly  new and  
radically   counterintuitive  way  of  thinking   about   the  world.  That,  indeed,  is what  
makes  it  such  a fascinatinp•  subject.
At  first  glance,  this  book  may  strike  you  as  forbiddinp•ly   iiiatheinatical.  We 
encounter   Legendre,   Hermite,   and   Laguerre   polynomials,   spherical   harmonics, Bessel,  
Neumann,  and  Hankel  functions,   Airy  functions,  and  even  the  Rieinann zeta function—not  
to  mention  Fourier  transfomis,  Hilbert  spaces,  hennitian  oper- ators,  Clebsch-Gordan  
coefficients,  and  Lagrange  multipliers.  Is  all  this  baggage really  necessary?  Perhaps  
not,  but  physics  is  like  carpentry:  Using  the  rip•ht  tool makes  the job  ensier,  not  
more difficult,  and  teaching  quantum  mechaillcs  without the  appropriate  mathematical  
equipment  is  like  asking  the  student  to  dig  a foun- dation  with  a  screwdriver.  (On  thc 
 other  hand,  it  can  bc  tcdious  and  diverting  if the  instructor  feels  obliged  to  give  
elaborate  lessons  on  the  proDer  use  of  each tool.  My  own  instinct  is  to  hand  the  
students  shovels  and  tell  them  to  start  dig- ging.  They  may  develop  blisters  at  first, 
 but  I  still  think  this  is  the  most  efhcient and  exciting   way  to  learn.)  At  any  
rate,  I  can  assure  you  that  there  is  no  deep› mathematics  in  this book,  and  if  you  
run into something  unfamiliar,  and  you  don't hnd  my  explanation  adequate,  by  all  means  
nsk  someone  about  it,  or’  look  it  up.

Mary  Boas,  Motliematiccil Methods  in the  Ph; steal  Science.s,  2nd  ed.,  Wiley,  New York 
(1983),  or George  Arfken  and Hans-Jurgen  Weber, Mntliemnticnl Methods,I’m Physicisfs,  5th  ed„ 
 Academic  Press,  Orlando  (2000).  But  whatever  you  do,  don't let  the  mathematics—which   
fnr  us,  i‹  nnlv  a  from/ —interfere  with  the  nhvsics
Several  readers  have  noted  that  there are fewer  worked  examples  in this  book than  is 
customary,  and  that  some  important  material  is  relep•ated  to  tfie  problems. This is no 
accident. I don't  believe you can learn quantum mechanics  without  doing many exercises for 
yourself. Instructors should of course go over as many  problems in  class  as  time  allows,  but  
students  should  be  warned  that  this  is  not  a  subject
‹mum   wiiie i i   iiri,i or ie   ii‹is   i iacui ai   iiiv ui timin         ycou’  i      uc  v 
cut      rug     ‹i    wi  run      i ie w   scv
of  muscles  here,  and  there  is  simply  no  substitute  for  calisthenics.  Mark  Seinon

Preface         ix

suggested  that 1 offer a “Michelin  Guide”  to the problems,  with  varyinp•  numbers
u*»ial» iu iiiuioaic uJc icvci ui ui***ouit/ oliu ilupuETanuc. *u*a»cciJ*cu*mc a ¿uuu
idea (though, like the quality of a restaurant,  the significance of a problem  is partly a matter 
of  taste); I have adopted  the following  rating scheme:

an  essenti tl  nroblem  that  everv  reader  shnuld  studv:
a somewhat  more  difficult  or more peripheral  problem;
an  unusually  challenging  problem,  that  may  take over an  hour.
(No  stars  at  all  means  fast  food:  OK  if  you're  hungry,  but  not  very  nourishing.) Most 
 of  the  one-star  problems  appear  at  the  end  of  the  relevant  section;  most  of the 
three-star  problems  are at  the end of the chapter.  A  solution manual  is available (to  
instructors  only) from  the publisher.
In  preparinp•  the second  edition  I  have  tried  to retain  as much  as possible  the
npi   i i i    or      u in     i ii or.     i  i us   ciiiJ     wiinusacntu     i ringis   i s     
   i mpiiui   o,     w rim   i    w os    iii  uc  i i   its
long  and divertinp•;  it  has  been completely  rewritten,  with  the background  material on 
finite-dimensional vector spaces (a subject  with which most students at this level are  already  
comfortable)  relegated  to  the  Appendix.  I  have  added  some  examples in  Chapter   2  (and  
fixed  the  awkward  defi nitinn  nf  raising  ated  lnwering  nperntnrs for  the  harmonic  
oscillator).  In  later  chapters  I  have  made  as  few  changes  as  I could,  even  preserving  
the  numbering  o1  problems  and  equations,  where  possible.

in  Chapter  4,  for  instance,  a  simpler  proof  of  the  adiabatic  theorem  in  Chapter 10, 
and  a new  section  on  partial  wave  phase shifts in Chapter  11).  Inevitably,  the xccuiiu  
cui men  ix  ‹i  air  iuiigci  iiniii  tire  iii xi,  wiiicii  i  i cii  ci,   out  i  iiupc  ii  
is  cic‹uici and Nlore  accessible.
I   have  benefited   front   the  comments   and  advice  of  many  colleagues,   who rear  tne 
original  manuscript,  pointeci  out  weaxnesses  for errors)  in tfie first  eciition, suggested  
improvements  in  the  presentation,  and  supplied  interesting  problems.  I would  like to thank 
 in particular P. K.  Ara  ind (Worcester Polytech). Grep• Benesh (Baylor),  David  Boness  
(Seattle),  Burt  Brody  (Bard),  Ash  Carter (Drew),  Edward Chang   (Massachusetts),  Peter  
Collings  (Swarthniore),  Richard   Crandall   (Reed), Jeff Dunhain (Middlebury),  Greg Elliott 
(Puget  Sound),  John Essick (Reed), Gregg Franklin  (Carnegie  Mellon),  Henry  Greenside  (Duke), 
 Paul  Haines  (Dartmouth),
J.  R.  Huddle  (Navy),  Larry  Hunter  (Arnherst),  David  Kaplan  (Washington),   Alex Kuzmich  
(Georgia Tech),  Peter Leung (Portland  State), Tony  Liss (Illinois),  Jeifry Mallow  (Chicago  
Loyola),  Jame.s  McTa  ish  (Liverpool),  James  Nearing  (Miami), Johnny  Powell  (Reed),  
Krishna  Rajagopal   (MIT),  Brian  Raue  (Florida  Interna- tional),  Roberi  Reynolds  (Reed),  
Keith  Riles  (Michigan),  Mark  Semon  (Bates), Herschel  Snodgrass  (Lewis  and  Clark),  John  
Taylor (Colorado),  Stavros  Theodor- ams   (Cyprus),    A.S.  Tremsin   (Berkeley),   Dan   
Velleman   (Amherst),   Nicholas Wheeler  (Reed),  Scott   Willenbrock  (Illinois),  William  
Wootters  (Williams),   Sam Wurzel  (Brown),  and  lens Zorn  (Michigan).










uan um     ec  anics








CHAPTER

THE WAVE FUNCTION





Imagine  a  particle  of  mass  iii,  constrained  to  move  along  the  .i-axis,  subject  to some 
 specified  force  F(x. t)  (Figure  1. 1).  The  prog•rain  of  e’la.$SfCal   mechanics is  to  
determine   the  position   of  the  particle   at   any   given   time:  .  (r).  Once   we know   
that,  we  can  fip•ure  out   the  velocity  (u   =   âx/clt),  the  niomentuiii   (p  = ni u),  
the  kinetic   energ•y   [T   ——   (1/2)iti u'),  or  any   other  dynamical   variable  of

ond   law:   F          rna.  (For  cousei vative   systems—the   only   kind   we  shall  con- 
sider,  and,  fortunately,   the  only  kind  that  occ'i,ir   at  the  microscopic   level—the 
force  can  be  expressed   as  the  derivative  of  a  potential   enerp•y   function,'   F
—b V/b.v.  and  Newton's  law  reads  ix  1-.v/clt -         —’b V/b.  .)  This,  together  with 
appropriate  initial  conditions  (typically  the  position  and  velocity  at  r  =   0),  deter- 
mines .r
Quantum  mechanics  approaches  this  same  problem  quite  differently.  In  this case  what  
we're  looking  for  is  the  particle's  wave  function,  T (.i, r).  and  we  get it  by  solving 
 the  Schriidinger  equation:





' Magnetic  lorccs  are an exception.  but  lct's not  worry  about  them just  yet.  By  the  way. 
 we shall ilssulpc  tlHoiipliout  this  book  that  the  m‹ition  is  nonrelativi.stic  ( i'       
‹’1.

2           Cl   abter  1    Tl  r  !f!ave Functioit


m

x(r›


FIGURE 1.1:    A “particle” constrained  to move in one dimension  under the influence of a 
specified force.

Here f  is the square root of  — 1, and fi  is Planck's constant—or  rather,  his ori,giiio/
constant  (ft) divided  by  2x:


ft  =   2
=   1.054572  x  10³‘J s.
[1.2]

The  Sclirodinger  equation  plays  a  role  logically  analogous  to  Newton's  second law: Given 
suitable initial conditions  (typically,  T(.r, 0)), the Schiodinger equation determines  T (.x. r) 
 for  all  future  time,  just  as,  in  classical  mechaiucs,  Newton’s




But  what exactly  i.s  this “wave function,”  and  what  does it  do for you once  you’ve
,qt9f  lI‘/  liter air, a particle,  0y  us nature,  is iocaiizea  at  a point,  wnereas  me wave 
function  frs  its  nnme  su»ezt94  is  snrend  nut  in  mace  fit’s  a  functirin  rif  r.  for  
any given time i). How can such  an object  represent  the state of a  Lai lic’l‹•’!  The answer is 
 provided  by  Born’s  statistical  interpretation of  the  wave  function,  which  says that  | 
4'(.v, f)|-  gives the pr  bo6iflD'  of finding  the particle at point .v, at  time r —or, more  
precisely,"



probability  of  findinp•  the  particle
between o and 1›, at  time  r.
[ 1.3)


Probability  is the are‹r  under the graph of |T |-. For the wave function in Figured lb.2J
mm n,  wncrc   w
is  target and  relatively  If/? likely  to  find rt' near point     !             '


'For a delightful  first-hand  account  of  the origins  of” the Sclvodingei  equ•\tit›n  sec tl1C 
iI/lCI0  bv Felix  Bleach  in 6/it'.air.T  Tod‹ij .  Dcccinhci   I 97G.
“The  wave  function  itself  is c‹›mplex.  but  |T |'   -   T* T  (where  T*  is the conlplcx  
c‹›MjU   ilte of T )  is rcal  and  nnnncgalivc—as  a  prob:ihilily.  ol” c‹›urre.  m«.xl  bc.

Sectioii 1.2.•  Time Statistical lnterpreI‹Jtion        3












FIGURE 1.2:    A typical wave function. The shaded  area  represents  the probability  of finding 
the particle between n and b. The particle would be relatively likely to be found near A, and  
unlikely to be found  near B.

The  sumsiirnl  interoretation  introduces  a  kind  nf  indeferminnrv   into  oiian- turn  
mechanics,  for even  if  you  know  everything  the  theory  has  to  tell  you  about the  
particle  (to  wit:  its  wave  function),  still  you  cannot  predict  with  certainty  the 
outcome  of  a  simple  experiment   to  measure  its  position—all  quantum  mechan- ics  has  to  
offer  is  slnli.slical   information   about   the   Nos.little   results.  This  inde- 
terlTlinacy   has  been  profoundly   disturbing   to  physicists   and  philosophers   alike.

theorr.
Suppose  I  do  measure  the  position  of  the particle,  and I  hnd  it  to  be  at  point
C.     @lfC•5f/Of?:    Where  was  the particle just  hefoi e  I  made  the measurement?  There nre 
 three nlausible  answers  to this auestion.  and  thev  serve  to characterize  the main schools  
of  thoupq•ht  regarding  quantum  indeterminacy:
1.   the realist position:  Tlte particle ives at C.  "this certainly  seems like a sen-

true then quantum  mechanics  is an   iitcomjJlete  theory,  since  the particle  i enll;'  nsas at 
 C,   and  yet  quantum  mechanics  was  unable  to  tell  us  so.  To  the  realist,  indeter- 
nfinacy  is nol  a fact of nature.  but  a reflection  of our ignorance.  As d'Espagnat  put it, 
“the  position  of  the particle  was  never  indeterminate,  but  was  merely  unknown to the 
experimenter.”” Evidently  T  is not  the whole  story—some  ildditional  infor- maiioiti  iown  as 
 a hidden  variaiiiej  is neeciea  to provme  a coiiipieie  aescripiion of  the particle.
2.  The orthodox  position:  Tlte  jJ‹ti lic'le  ivasit ’t i enll\’  cm;’   flier e. It  was the 
act of measurement  that  forced  the particle  to “take  a  stand”  (though  how  and  why  it 
decided  on the polnt  C   we dare not  ask).  Jordan  said it  most  stai kly: “Observations not  
only  dfsllill›   what  is  to  be  nieasured,   they  produce   it  ...     We  coiit;›el   (the

OI” course.  no  measuring  instrunicnt  is  perfectly  prccisc:  what  I  i»c‹iii   is  chac  the  
particle  was
found  ill  //ir  i'ir.i/tir\  ot" yF.    to     ithin  the  to1crance  of" the  equipment.
*Bernard d" 2spagrlat. “TUC     UilflfUm Theory and Reality” (Scientific  Americiin. Novcnibcr  
1979,

4         Cl upter 1    The V!ave Fii›i6fio›i

particle)  to  assume  a  definite  position.  ⁶  This  view  (the  so-called  Copenhagen

has  always  been  the  mo.st  widely  accented  oosltion.  Note,  however,  that  if  it  is 
correct  there  is  something  very  pecullar about  the act of measurement—something that  over  
half  a century  of debate  has done  precious  little  to  illuminate.
3.  The  agnostic  position:  Refuse  In   ut.sii'ei’.  This  is  not  quite  as  silly  as  lt 
sounds—after  all,  what  sense  can  there  be  in  making  assertlons  about  the  status of  a  
particle  I e/or‹   a  measurement,  when  the  only  way  of  knowing  whether  you

s      s        xz r1•t i  r•1•t    r•ri c• n
ree z ki
I    t r rna i    rv<•f    i c•   ri  rn
lonp•er  “before  the  measurement’?” It  is metaphysics  (in  the pejorative  sense of  the word)  
to  worry  about  soniethinp•  that  cannot,  by  its  nature,  be  tested.  Pauli  said: “One 
should  no more rack one‘s brain about  the problem  of whether something one
cannot  know  anything  about  exists  all  the same.  than  about  the  ancient  question  of how  
many angels aie able to sit on the point of a needle.   7  For decades this was the tali-baCK    
position or  most  physicists:  1ney  d try  to seli you  tfie orthodox  answer,
but  if  you  were  persistent  they’d  retreat  to  the  agnostic  response,  and  terminate  the
conversation.
Until  fairly  iecently,  all  three  positions  (realist,  orthodox,  and  agnostic)  had

I  at'it     akes'an  ‹!  ’s“e!  ahlt•  d $feence  whether'ihe  pa   icle“hada  preci'se'(thou   h 
unknown)  posilion  prior  to  the  nieasurenient,  or  not.  Bell's  discovery  effectively 
eiiminaieci  agnosiici.em  as  a  viañie  opnon,  anci  mane  ii  an  eaJaei fiifeiii‹li  question 
whether  1  or 2 is ilic correct  choice.  I’ 11  return  to this  story  at  the end of the  book, 
when you  will be in a better position  to appreciate Bell's argument;  for now, suffice it  to  
say  that  the  experinients  have  decisively  conhrmed  the  orthodox  interpreta-

more  than  the  ripples  on  a  pond  do;  it  is  the  measurement  process  that  insists  on 
one  particular  number,  and  thereby  in  a  sense  ci’eate.s  the  specific  result,  limited 
only  by  the  st‹itistical  weighting  imposed  by  the  wave .function.
What  it’ I  made  a  secoitcl  ineasurenient.  iiiiiiiedioreJy  after  the  first‘?  Would  I get 
C  again, or does  the act of‘ iueasurenienl  cough  up sonie completely  new  num- nei  each time  
 cn   tnis questlon ever yone is in  ap•reement:  A repeated  nieasureinent (on  the  same  
particle)  must  return  the  same  value.  Indeed,  it  would  be  tough  to prove  that  the 
particle  was  really  found  at  C   in  the  fiist  instance,  if  this  could  not be confirmed  
by  immediate  repetition  of  the nieasureiiient. How  does  the orthodox

”  yuotcu   In   a   tovclY   th tlcic  ICY   w .  utivlu    aen11li1.     Is   tile   moon   tnerc 
  wilen   nooouy   looks
(Physics Today.  April  1'3'l5.  p.  3d).
7Qu‹›tccl fry  Mcl'n1in  (tootn‹›tc  G).  g. 4fJ.
“This statemcnc  i.s :i liltle  cuu slrc›ne: Thcrc  i'cl11ilin  i{  l"ew  theurccical  anct 
expel'imcntaI  loopholcs. sunic  ul”  w!iicli  I  shall  ctiscuss  in  llJc  At”tcru t›l'd.  There  
cxist  vi8hle  nonluc‹il  hidden   v«riablc  theories (i1ot:1hly  D‹ivid  buhill”s).  : nd c›t!1ci  
 1T›ri11ulatinMs  (sucll  ›is  the  man}’  worlds  interprctatioil)  tl1‹it  Ju    nt›t fit  
cleanly  intL8  ilny  ot” my  tN'cc  c•itegoi ics.  But  I  think  it  is  wi.sc.  .it  least  
t‘rum  u  peck\gUeifii\t  @?iDf     I view.  It›  ‹idc›pt  ‹i  clc«i  i Mel  c‹›heicnt  plc ttoi In 
 :it  tI1is  six\gc.  i net  wurry  ahout  the  ‹lltci ilativcs  Iatc‹°.

Section  1.3.  Probability         5












FIGURE 1.3:    Collapse  of  the  wave  function:  graph  of  JVJ2   immediately  after  a
measurement  has found the particle at point C.

interpretation  account  for the  fact  that  the  second  measurement  is  bound  to yield the  
value  C?  Evidently  the  first  measurement  radically  alters  the  wave  function,

tion  collapses,  upon  measurement,  to  a  spike  at  the  point  C  (it  soon  spreads  out 
again,  in  accordance  with  the  Schriidmger  equation,  so  the  second  measurement must  be 
made quickly).  There are,  then,  two entirely  distinct  kinds of physical  pro- cesses:  
“ordinary”  ones,  in  which  the  wave  function  evolves  in  a leisurely  fashion under  the  
Schrodinger  equation,  and  “measurements,”  in  which  T   suddenly  and discontinuously  
collapses.

1.3  PROBABILITY
1.3.1  Discrete Variables
Because of the statistical  interpretation, probability  plays a central role in quantum mechanics, 
so I digress now for a brief discussion of probabllity  theory. It is mainly a question  of  
introducing  some  notation  and  terminology,  and  I  shall  do it in  the context  of  a simple 
example.
Imagine  a room containing  fourteen  people,  whose  ages are as follows:

one  person  aged  14, one  person  aged  15, three  people aged  16,

The  role  of  measurement   in  quantum   mechanics   is  so  critical  and  so  bizarre   that  
you  may well  be  wondering  what  precisely  constitutes   a  iiieasurerrient.  Does  it  have  
to  do  with  the  interaction between  a  microscopic  (quantum)  system  and  a  macroscopic  
(classical)  measuring  apparatus  (as  Bohr insisted),  or  is  it  char-actcrized  by  the  
leaving  of a  permanent  “record”  (as Heisenberg  claimed).  Of  does it  involve  the  
intervention  of  a  conscious  “observer”  (as  Wigner  proposed)?  I'll  return  to  this  thorny 
issue  in  the  Afterword:  tor  the  moment  let's  take  the  naive  view:  A  measurement  is  
the  kind  of  thing that  a  scientist  does  in  the  laboratory.  with 1s lers.  stopwatches,  
Geiger  counters,  and  so on.


6         Chapter 1    The Wave htinction

two  people  aged  22, two  people  aged  24. five          Ie a•_ed 25.






V(24)      2,


i e              or   ns ance  is   ero      e          nu     er o   peop e in    e roo     s

N  =         N(j).                                              [1.4]


following  are  some  questions  one  might ask about  this distribution.
Que.stioii  1.    If  you  selected  one individual  at random  front  this group,  what

14.  since  there  are  14  possible  choices.  all equally  likely.  of  whom  only  one  has that 
 particular  age.  If  !’(.i)  is  the  probability  of  getting•  apse   j,   then   P(I 4)  = 
1/14. P(15) =  1/14, P(16) =  .3/14, and  so on. In general,



N(j)









10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23   24  25  26     j


distribution in Section 1.3.1.




Notice  that  the  probability  of  getting  either  14 or  15  is the siiiii  of  the individual 
probabi1itie.s  (in  this  case,  1/7).  In  particular,  the  sum  of  all  the  probabilities  is


P(j)      l.                                              [1.6]

Qiteslinli  2.    What  is  the  most  probable  age?  Aitswei .  25,  obviously;  five

niost  probable  /  is  the  i  for  which  P(i)  is a maximum.
Qiieslinii  J.      What  is the  median  age?  Answer .  23, for 7 people  are  younger than  23,  
and  7  are  older.  (In  general,  the  median  is  that  value  of  ./  such  that  the prnhahil 
ity   nf   g‹rt1ing   a   larger  result   is  th‹r   same  as  the  prnhnhility   nf  gel1ino  a 
smaller  result.)
Questinii  4.     What  is  the  average (or  mean)  age?  Air.si‹'ei.
(14) -J- (15) -J- 3(16) -J- 2(22) -J- 2(24) -J- 5(25)      294      JJ
14                                         14
n  •e   era   t  e a  era•e   a ue o      (w   c   we     al   wr te t  u





this example  nobody  happens  to be 21 or  23.  In  quantum  mechanics  the  average is  usually  
the  quantity  of  interest;  in  that  context  it  has  come  to  be  called  the

you  would  be  most  likely  to  get  if  you  made  a  single  measurement  (r/ter  would be  the 
 rfosr /aioñabfe  vri/iie,  not  the  averap•e  value)—but  I’m  afraid  we're  stuck

ue ation  5.    What  is  the  avera  e of  the  .in tiai es  of  the  a  es?  Aris  Rei:  You 
could  g•et  14-  =  l9G,  with  probability  1/14,  or  15-  =  225,  with  probability  1/14,
,  wi                    y:       , an   so on.      e average,    en, is


j=0
In g•enera1,  the average  value of  some  fi,mctinii  of  y  is given  by


(f(i))'    /j.flit   (i .                            [1.9)

8       Chapter  1    TI›e \fi'ar'e Function

/\f(J)  I                                                                             N(j












1     2     3     4     5     6     7     8     9    10       j                  1    2    3     4  
  5    6    7    8     9   10      j

FIGURE 1.1:    Two  histograms  with  the same median,  same average, and same  most probable 
value, but different standard  deviations.

(Equations  1.G,  1.7, and  1.8 are, if you like, special cases of  this formula.) Be  care. The  
average  of  the  squares,   (y   ),  is  not   equal,  in  general,  to  the  square  of  the 
average,  ( /)  .  For  instance,  if  the  room  contains  just  two  babies,  ap•ed  1   and  3, 
then  (. ')  =  5,  but  {.r)- =  4.
Now, there is a conspicuous difference between the two histograms in Figure  1.5. even though  they 
 have the same median,  the same average,  the same most  probable value, and the same number of 
elements: The first is sharply peaked about the average value, whereas the second is broad and 
flat. (The first might represent  the age profile for students  in a big-city  classroom,  the 
second,  perhaps,  a rural  one-rooms  school- house.)  We need a  numerical  measure  of  the  
amount  of “spread”  in a distribution, with  respect  to the average.  The most  obvious  way  to 
do this would  be to find out

1.10

and compute  the average  of  AJ. Trouble is, of  course,  that  you  poet ‹-em, since, by the 
nature of  the average,  Ay  is as often  negative as  positive:

(A7) =     (J — li)  P(i) =      iP(i) — I7)      P(i)
=Q)- Q)=0
(Note  that  (y)  is  con.stant—it  does  not  change  as  you  go  from  one  member  of” the  
sample  to  another—so  it  can  be  taken  outside  the  summation.)  To  avoid  this irritating   
problem  you  might   decide  to  average  the  nbsnlute  vnlue   of   Ay.  But absolute  values  
are  nasty  to  work  with;  instead,  we  get  around  the  sign  problem by  squoritig  before  
averag•ing:

[ 1.11)







rat
This  quantity  is  known  as  the  variance  of  the  distribution;  w  itself  (the  square root  
of  the  average  of  the  square  of  the  deviation  front  the  averap•e—gulp!)  is
1
about {y).
’l“here  is a useful  little theorem on  variances:

•'      (‹'*7)'J         (^•i '   (i  =     ‹.i — I.i)›'P(i)



—— li-) — 2/›)/.i) + li)  —— I.i-) — li)'-
Taking  the square root, the standard  deviation  itself  can  be written  as

[1.1 2)

In  practice,  this  is  a  much  faster  way  to  get  w: Simply  calculate  (./-)  and  (y)-, 
subtract,  and  take  the  square  root.  Incidentally,  I  warned  you  a moment  ago  that
ouis  no    in  gei era    enq  a                               cs  p a    y  nonnega i  e  (  ro n 
   s
definition  in Equation  1.11),  Equation  1.12  implies  that

[1 .13)


spread  at all  (every  member  having the same  value).

1.3.2  Continuous  Variables
So far, I have assuirled  that  we are  dealing  with  a discrete  variable—that  is, one that  can 
 take  on  only  certain  isolated  values  (in  the  example,  ./  had  to  be  an

‹-oiitiiiuoti.‹  distributions. lf 1 select a random  person  off  the street,  the probability 
that  her age  is  pi ecisel y  16  years, 4 hours,  27  minute.s,  and  3.333 . . ,  seconds  is

some  inrerr'a/ —say,  between  16  and  17.  N the  interval  is srifficiently  short,  this 
probability is  pi npni tioiml to the length nftlie interval. For example, the chance that

that  it  is  between  16  and  16  plus  oiie  day.  (Unless,  I  suppose.  there  was  some 
extraordinary  baby  boom  16  years  ago,  on  exactly  that  day—in  which  case  we a  e smpy  c 
 osen  a     ner  a    oo   on     or    e      e  o appy         e   a  y   oo


er           e     aue

lasted  six  hours,  we'll  take  intervals  of  a  second  or less,  to  be on  the  safe side.
Technically,  we're taIkinp• about  mfimtestriicil  intervals.)  1’hus
probability  that  an  individual  (chosen
at  ran   om     res    etween .r  an      .r +     x
The proportionality  factor,  p(.v),  is often  loosely  called  “the  probability  of  getting r   
   u       s  s s oppy   anguage   a   e  er  e       s pro            y    e       y       e pro  
a     i y










[(.v) p(x) d.v.                                [1.18]




Example  1.1     Suppose  I  drop  a  rock  off  a cliff  of  hei•pht  /i.  A    it  1’:ills.  I  
‹nip  a

the  rock  has  fallen.  Qil€Stfoll.  What  is  the ‹n ‹•r I(t’  k8‘   il l  $hk  k  L i  /:fuck    
 ’1 i'a!
to say, what  is  the time ovcrngc  of  the distance  traveled‘?"'
Solution:  The rock starts out at rest, and picks up speed as it falls; it spends more t    e  ne   
     e   op   so    e  average     sta  ce     ust  be  less  t  an      2    gnor ng  a r




The velocity is d.v/dt  =  gr, and the total flight time is T         2  /   . The probability that 
 the  camera  flashes  in  the  interval  df  is dr/ T,  so the  probability  that  a given

'"A    statistician  will  complain  that  I  am  confusing  the  average  ol‘ a  Jiiire  srinipfc  
(it  million,  in this  case)  with  the  “true“  avel'age  (over  the  whole  continuuiil).  This  
can  be  an  awkward  problem  for the exnerimentalist. e.specially  when  the  sample  size  is 
small,  but  here  I am only  concerned.  of course. with  the  true  ‹ivcrage.  to  which  the 
sample  average  is  presumably  a  good  approximation.

Section 1.3:  Probability         11












h



photograph  shows  a  distance  in  the  corresponding  range  dx   is

dx.






(outside  this  range, of  course,  the probability  density  is zero).
We  can check  this result,  using Equation  1.16:


1/2)



e a»era$e    is ance     qua  on           is

"        1     dx         1   


2    3/2
0        2f37            2
which is somewhat  lcss  than  /i/2, as anticipated.
Figure  1.6  shows  the  graph  of   p(.x).  Notice  that  a  probability  density  can be  
infinite,  though  probability  itself  (the  iiitegrnl  of   p)  must  of  course  be  finite 
(indeed,  less than or equal  to 1).

12         Cl at›ter 1    The Wave  function





(b)   Determine  Ay  for  each  y,  and  use  Equation  1.11  to  compute  the  standard
deviation.
(c)   Use  your  results  in  (a)  Mld  (b)  to check  Equation  1.12.

Problem 1.2
(a)   Find  the  standard  deviation  of  the distribution  in  Example  1.1.
(b)   What  i.s  the  probability  that  a photograph,  selected  at  random,  would  show  a
distance  x  more  than  one  standard  deviation  awav  from  the  avera•e?

+Problem 1.3   Consider  the gaussian  distribution



where  A,  a,  and  X  are  positive  real  constants.  (Look  up  any  integrals  you  need.)
(a)   Use  Equation  1.16  to  determine  A.
(b)  Find  tx1,  lx-1,  and    .
Icl    Sketch  the    ranh  rif  c (xL


1.4  NORMALIZATION
We return now to the statistical  interpretation of the wave function  (Equation  1.3), which  says 
that |T(x, t)|'  is the probability  density for finding the particle at point x,  at  time  r.  It 
 follows  (Equation  1.16)  that  thc  integral  of  |T |2  must  be  1  (thc particle's got  to be 
Somewhere):





Without  this,  rhe  statistical  interpretation  would  be  nonsense.
However   this reniiirement  shriuld  disturb  you:  After  all.  the  wave  function  is supposed  
to  be  determined  by  the  Schrodinger  equation—we  can’t  go  imposing an extraneous  condition 
on  T   without  checking  that  the  two are consistent.  Well, a

Sectioti  1.4:  Norioo/ieuriom          13

glance at Equation  1.1 reveals that if W(.i. r) is a solution, so too is AT(z. i), where A  is  
any  (complex)  constant.  What  we  must  do,  then,  is  pick  this  undetermined multiplicative  
factor  so  as  to  ensure  that  Equation  1.20  is  satisfied.  This  process is called  
normalizing  the  wave  function.  For  some  solutions  to  the  Schrddinger equation  the  
intep•ra1  is   infinite;  in  that  case  no  multiplicative  factor  is going  to

solutions  cannot  represent  particles,  and  must  be  rejected.  Physically  realizable states 
correspond  to the square-integrable solutions to Schrfidinger's equation.' '

How do I know that it will  srov  normalized, as time goes on, and  T evolves? (You can't  keep  
renormalizing  the  wave function,  for  then  A  becomes  a function  of  r, and  you  no longer  
have  a solution  to  the  Schrodinger  equation.)  Fortunately,  the Schrâdinp•er equation has the 
remarkable property that it automatically  preserves the normalization  of  the wave 
function—without  this crucial  feature  the Schrodinger equation  would  be incompatible  with  
the  statistical  interpretation, and  the  whole

This is important,  so we'd  better  pause for a careful  proof. To  begin  with,

+ x,i);'d.› ——
+• Jby;w(i,›);- zx.            [1.21)

(Nntr‘  that  the  inro@›-nf   i<  n  fMnr tinn  nn\y  nf  r,  «n  T  use     n    mm/     
rJr'rivntiv/•  (J,/Mr)
in  the  first  expression,  but  the  integt arid  is a function  of .   as  well  as  r, so it's 
a
partial  derivative  (h/fir)  in  the second  one.)  By  the product  rule,





Now  the Schrodinger  equation  says  that

vw,


[1.23)


and  hence also (taking the complex  conjugate  of  Equation  1.23)

vs*,


[ 1.24]


SO’



bx        ‘bx

«)         25)


' ' Evidently  T(.v. /)  must go to zero  faster than  1 /         ,  as |.r| —+  on. Incidentally. 
 normalization only  fixes  the  ntoduliis   of  A:  the  pluise  remains  undetermined.  However.  
as  we  shall  see,  the  latter carries  no  physical  significance  anyway.

14         Chapter 1    The Wave Ft.inctioti

The  integral  in  Equation  1.21 can now  be evaluated  explicitly:



df  Job                                         2/›i   \        dx           dx       /1—in
f1.261

But T(.r. t) must go to zero as z goes to (fi) infinity—otherwise the wave function would  not  be  
normalizable." It follows  that

[1.271

and  hence  that  the  integral  is conSft2lir  (independent  of  time);  if  T  is  normalized at  
r  =  II, it .siaJ'.i  normalized  for all future  time.    QED

Problem 1.4  At time r  =  0 a particle  is represented  by  the wave function

x
A -.
b

if  0 y z     ‹r,

if  n     x     b,

otherwise,


(a)   Normalize  T  (that  is, find  A, in terms of  o  and  b).


tcj   wiiere  is  tne  particle most  iixely  to  fie  founci,  at  r  =   u‘?
(d)   What  is  the  probability  of  Ending  the  particle  to  the  left  of  o‘/  GhecK  your
result  in  the  limiting  cases b —— n and  b —— 2s.
(e)   What is the expectation  value of .v?

sProblem 1.5  Consider  the wave function


where  A, X, and in are positive real constants. (We'll see in Chapter  2 what potential i         
..  ii..      u..      ...   u    ...  ..   r..    +.
(a)   Normalize  T.
(b)   Determine  the expectation  values of  x and x-.

’‘A    good mathematician  can supply  you wit)i pathological  counterexamples, but they do not 
arise in  physics.  for  us  the  wave  function  rifu'rrv.t  goes  to zel'o  at  infinity.

Section 1.5.-  Momenturrr     1S

(c)   Find  the  standard  deviation  of  .  .  Sketch  the  graph  of  |T |²,  as  a  function of  
x,  and mark  the  points  ((x) +     ) and  ({a’)  —     ),  to illustrate  the  sense  in which   
   represents  the “spread” in .  .  What  is the probability  that  the particle would  be found  
outside  this range?


1.5  MOMENTUM                                                                                       
                     
For  a  particle  in  state  W,  the expectation  value  of .i  is





What  exactly  does  this  mean? It emphatically  does  nor  mean  that  if  you  measure the  
position  of  one particle  over and  over  again,  f  x     'dx   is  the average  of  the

terminate)  will collapse the  wave function  to a spike at  the  value actually  obtained, and the 
subsequent  measurements (if they're performed  quickly)  will simply repeat

all tn the state      , which means that either you must  find  some way  of returning  the 
particle  to its original  state  after  each  measurement,  or else  you  have  to  prepare  a

all of them:  {.  )  is the averap•e of the.se  results. (I like to picture  a row of bottles on a 
shelf, each containing  a particle in the state  W  (relative to the center of  the bottle). A  
graduate  student  with  a ruler  is  assigned  to each  bottle,  and  at  a  signal  they  all 
measure  the  positions  of  their  respective  particles.  We  then  construct  a  histogram
of  the  results,  which  should  match  |T |2,  and  compute  the  average,  which  should
agree  with (.i). (Of course,  since  we're only  using  a finite  sample,  we can't  expect 
perfect  agreement,  but  the  more  bottles  we use,  the  closer  we ought  to come.)) In show,  
the expectofion  vnlue  is the average  of i epeated measurements  on nn ensem- ble  of  identfCall 
y prepat ed  .s)'.steitis,  not  the  average  of  repeated  measurements  on one  and  the  same  
system.
Now,   as   time  goes  on,   (.  )   will  change  (because   of   the   time  dependence of  T),  
 and  we  might  be  interested  in  knowing  how  fast  it  moves.  Referring•  to Equations  1.25 
 and  1.28,  we  see that 1"


d  x)  _
di    "
°)'›) .I  .        29]


'"To keep  things  from  getting  too cluttered.  I’ 11  suppress  lhe  limits  ofi integration.





This expression  can  be simplified  rising integration-by-parts:¹⁴

-   v



[l .30]

use         ‘ac                           , an      rew away         oun         erm, on    e groun

the second  term,  we conclude:


dt


ity”  of  the  e.vpectation  value  of z,  which  is  not  the  same  thing  as the  velocity  of 
ihe yorficie. Nothing we have seen so far would enable us to calculate  the velocity

particle  doesn't  have a detenninate  position (prior  to measurement),  neither  does it have  a 
well-defined  velocity.  All  we could  reasonably  ask  for is the piobnhilil)   of getting  a 
particular  value.  We’11  see  in Chapter 3 how  to construct  ihe  probability density  for  
velocity,   given   T     for  our  Present  Purposes  it  will   suffice  to  Postu-
late  that  the  expectation  value  of the  velocit,  i.s  equal  to the  ttme dei ivatii›e  of 
the
toevye       ion       we of;   osi                                                     n



Equation  1.31  tells us,  then,  how  to calculate {u)  directly  from  W.
Actually,  it  is  customary  to  work  with  momentum  (p       mv), rather  than velocity:

dt                                                                   [1.33]



'   The  product  rule  says  that




from  which  it  follows  that




Under  the  integral  sign.  then.  you  can  peel  a derivative  oft’ one  factor  in  a  product, 
 and slap  it  onto  the other  one—it' 11  cost  you  a  minus  sign.  and  you'll  pick  up  a  
boundary  term.

Let  me  write  the expressions  for  (.r)  and  (p)  in  a more suggestive  way:

[J.14]

4  dx.

We  say  that  the  operatorl    .r    represents”  position,  and  the  operator  (h/ i)(0/fi.r) 
“represents”  momentum,  in quantum mechanics;  to calculate expectation  values we “sandwich”  the 
 appropriate  operator  between  T*   and  T,   and  inte•prate.
That‘ s cute,  Dut  wñat  afiout  otiier quantities?  Tne  i“act  is, all  ciassicai  aynami- cal  
ver iahles ran  he expressed  in  terms nf position  and  momenfilin   K inetir  energy for 
example,  is



and  anp•ri1ar  momentum  is
L =  r  x my =  r  x p
(the  latter,  of  course,  does  not  occur  for  motion  in  one  dimension).  To  calculate the 
expectation  value  of  anr  such  quantity,  Q_ (x, p),  we  simply  replace  every   ›


[1.36]




[1,37]


quantity,  for  a particle  in  state  T:   it  subsuiries  Equations  1.34  and  1.35  as special 
cases.  I  have  tried  in  this  section  to  iTlake  Equation  1.36  seeiii  plausible,   given 
Born’s statistical  intcrprctation.  but  thc  truth is that  this rcpicscnts  such  a i adically 
new  way  of  doing• business (as compared  with classical  mechanics)  that  it's a •pOod idea  to 
 g•et  sofne  practice  usiiig  it  before  we  come  back  (in  Chapter 3)  and  put  it

an ri.’tour, that's  fine  with  me.

'-  An  “tiperalor”  is  an  instruction   to  Act  soiiief/tiitg   to  the  lunctioli  that  
li›llows  it.  The  position opcl-at‹›r  tells  you  to  tiin/fip/J'   by  .v:  the  momentum  
operator’  tells  you  to  ‹f@c reitririt‹   with  respect   to
.    (and  multiply   the  re.sult   by   — ih).  II1  tllis  book    all  operators  will  he  
derivatives  (¿//‹//,  ‹/'/‹//'.
‹J'/‹T.?rJ¿ .  etc.)  or  nlultipliel's  (2.  /.  .?'. etc.). or  combinations  of  dlese.




Problem  1.6  Why can't  you do intep•ration-by-parts directly  on the middle expres- sion  in  
Equation  1.29 —pull  the  time  derivative  over onto x,   note  that  h.  /hr  =   0, and  
conclude  that  d(.i )/r/i      0?

*Problem  1.7   Calculate  d(p)/  lt.  Air.swei  .


dt
Equations  1.32  (or  the  first  part  of  1.33)  and  1.38  are  instances  of  Ehrenfest's 
theorem,  which  tells us that expec’tttli‹›ii i!alties ohe)  classical  la ws.


I  mean  indenendent  of .   as  well  as i). In e lassical  mechanics  this doesn't  chanp•e 
anythinp•,  but  what  about  cjuaiituui  mechanics?  Show  that  the  wave  functlon  picks up  a  
time-dependent  phase  factor:  exp(—i Ybi /fi).  What  effect  does  this  have  on the  
expectation  value  of  a dynamical  variable?


1.6  THE UNCERTAINTY  PRINCIPLE
Imap•ine  that  you're  holdinp•  one  end  of  a  very  1onp•  rope,  and  you  generate  a wave  
by shaking  it  up and  down  rhythmically  (Figure  1.7). If  someone  asked  you “Precisely  
where is  that  wave?” you'd  probably  think he was a little bit nutty: The

hand,  if  he  asked  you  what  its  i»ai›eleiigtli   is,  you  could  p•ive  him  a  reasonable 
answer:  It  looks  like  about  6  feet.  By  contrast,  if  you  p•ave  the  rope  a sudden jerk 
(Figure  1.8), you’d get a relatively  narrow  bump traveling  down  the line. This time the first  
question  (Where  precisely  is  the  wave?) is a sensible  one,  and  the  second (What  is  its  
wavelength?)  seems  nutty—it  isn't  even  vaguely  periodic,  so  how can  you  assign a  
wavelength  to it? Of course,  you can draw  intermediate  cases,  in which  the  wave  is fair/y  
well  localized  and  the  wavelenp•th  is fairly  well  defined. but  there  is an  inescapable  
trade-off  here:  The  more  precise  a  wave's  position  is. the  less precise  is its  
wavelenp•th,  and  vice  versa.'6  A  theorem  in Fourier  analysis

argument.

*Thac’.s why a piccolo player niusl be righc en pitch. whereas a dcuble-ba.s.s  player can al"ford 
tc we‹e garden  gloves. ror the piccolo. a  sixty-t“ourtli note contains m«ny  full cycles. and the 
 fi equenc}’ (we”re  working in the  time domain  now. instead nf space)  is well defined. whereas  
for the bass. at a mu«h lower register. the sixty-fourth note cont‹uns ooly ›t tcw cycles, nnrl nll 
ynu heai  is n genei al rnrt of “oomph,” with no very clear pitch.

Section 1.6:  The Vncertoint y Principle         1f





10                         20        30

wave  wit          air      we         ne



10                    20          30
40                   S0  x (feet)

ut  an  i          ne




40                     50   x (feet)

FIGURE 1.8:    A  wave  with  a (fairly)  well-defined  position,  but  an  ill-defined  wave-
length.


the quantum mechanical  wave function. Now  the wavelength  of  T  is related to the
momentum  of  the  particle  by  the de Broglie  formula:'⁷

[1 .39]

Thus a spread in wavelength  corresponds  to a spread in momentum,  and our general observation  
now  says  that  the  more  precisely  determined  a  particle’s  position  is, the  less precisely 
 is its momentum.  Quantitatively,

[l .40]


where  cr.,   is  the  standard  deviation  in  z,   and  cry   is  the  standard  deviation  in  
/›. This  is Heisenberg's  famous  uncertainty  principle.  (We'll  prove  it  in Chapter 3, but  I 
 wanted  to  mention  it  right  away,  so  you  can  test  it  out  on  the  examples  in

Please  understand  what  the  uncertainty  principle  means:  Like  position  mea- surements,  
momentum   measurements  yield  precise  answers—the  “spread”  here refers  lu  the  fact  that  
measurements  on  identically  prepared  systems  do  nol  yield identical  results.  You  can,  if 
 you  want,  construct  a  state  such  that  repeated  posi- tioimeasurements  will  be  very  
close  together  (by  making  T   a localized  “spike”), but  you  will  pay  a  price:  Momentum  
measurements  on  this  state  will  be  widely scattered.  Or  you  can  prepare  a  state  with  
a  reproducible  momentum  (by  making

17  ‘11  prove  this  in  due  course.  Many  authors  take  the  de  Broglie  formula  as  an  
a.rioiii,  from which  they  then  deduce  the  association  of  momentum  with  the operator  (/i 
/ i)(0/fi.r).  Although  this  is a  conceptually  cleaner  approach,  it  involves  diverting  
mathematical  complications  that  I  would  rather save  for  later:

20         C6aprrr I     Tf r Wave F'unction

T   a long  sinusoidal  wave),  but  in  that  case, position  measurements  will  be  widely 
scattered.  And, of course,  if  you're in a really  bad mood  you can create  a state  for which 
neither position  nor momentum  is well defined: Equation  1.40 is an inequal- it!, and  there's  
no  limit  on  how  Fig  cr,  and        can  be—just  make  T   some  long wiggly  line  with  
lots  of  bumps  and  potholes  and  no periodic  structure.

»Problem  1.9  A  particle  of mass  iii  is in  the  state


where  A  and  u  are positive  real  constants.
(a)   Find  A.
(b)   For  what  potential  energy   function   V(.x)  does  T   satisfy   the  Schriidinger equa
(c)   Calculate  the expectation  values  of x,  .  -,  p,  and  p².
(d)   Find cry  and  w,. Is  their product  consistent  with  the  uncertainty  principle?


FURTHER  PROBLEMS  FOR CHAPTER  1
Problem  1.10  Consider  the  first  25 dip•its  in  the  decimal  expansion  of  w  (3,  1, 4,

(a)   If you selected one number at random, from this set, what are the probabilities

(b)   What  is  the  most  probable  digit?  What  is  the  median  digit?  What  is  the average  
value?
(c)   Find  the  standard  deviation  for this  distribution.

Problem  1.11  The  needle  on  a  broken  car  speedometer   is  free   to  swing,  and bounces  
perfectly  off  the  pins  at  either  end,  so  that  if  you  give  it  a  flick  it  is

(a)   What  is  the  probability  density,  p(8)*  HinI:  p(8) d8  is  the  probability  that the 
needle will come to rest between 8 and (8 +  d8). Craph  p(8) as a function of 8, front  —u/2  to 
3s/2. (Of course, part  of  this  interval  is excluded,  so  p is zero  there.) Make  sure  that  
the  total  probability  is  1.

Further  Problems [or Chapter 1         21

(b)   Compute  {8),  (8'),  and  w, for  this distribution.
(c)  Compute  {sin 8),  (cos 8), and  (cos- 8).

Problem  1.12  We consider  the same device as the previous  problem,  but this time we  are  
interested  in  the .v-coordinate  of  the  needle  point—that  is,  the  “shadow,” or  
“projection,”  of  the  needle  on  the  horizontal  line.

—2r  to  +2i ,  where  r  is  the  length  of  the  needle.  Make  sure  the  total  prob- ability  
is  1. Niitr:  p i.  ) d.v  is  the  probability  that  the  projection  lies  between x  and  (x + 
 d.v).  You  know  (from Problem  1.11)  the  probability  that  8  is  in a  p•iven  ranp•e;  the  
question  is,  what  interval  d.    corresponds   to  the  inter- val cl8?
(b)   Compute  {x),  (.r2), and w, for this distribution.  Explain  how  you  could  have obtained  
these  results  from  part  (c) of Problem  1.1 l.

Problem  1.13  Buffon's  needle.  A needle of length 1 is dropped  at random  onto a sheet  of  
paper  ruled  with  parallel  lines  a distance  /  apart.  What  is  the  probability that  the  
needle  will  cross a  line?  birf:  Refer  to Problem  1.12.

Problem 1.14  Let   P„ (t)  be  the  probability  of  finding  a  particle  in  the  range
(u  <  .v  <  fi),  at  tinic  r.

OW



where



What  are the units of 7(.v. r)? Comment:  7  is called the probability  current,
because  it  tells  you  the  rate  at  which  probability  is “flowing”  past  the  point
.i.  If  P„; {t)  is increasing,  then more  probability  is  flowing  into  the region  at one end 
 than  flows out  at  the other.
(b)   Find  the  probability  current  for  the  wave  function  in  Problem  1.9.  (This  is not  
a  very  pithy  example,  I'm  afraid;  we'll  encounter  more  substantial  ones in due course.)



22         Chapter 1    The have  function


+Prob1em 1.15  Sunpose  you  wanted  to  describe  an  unstable  particle,  that spon- taneously  
disintegrates  with  a  “lifetime”  T.  In  that  case  the  total  probability  of findings  the  
particle  somewhere  should  riot  be  constant,  but  should  decrease  at


T(. , r) |² dx     e  '''.

A  crude  way  of  achieving  this  result  is  as  follows.  In  Equation  1.24  we  tacitly 
assumed  that  U  (the  potential enerp•y)  is real. That  is certainly  reasonable,  but  it leads 
 to the “conservation  of  probability”  enshrined  in  Equation  1.27. What  if we assign  to  P 
an imaginary  part:


where  *o is  the true  potential  energy  and  F  is a positive  real  constant?
{a)   Show  that  (in place of Equation  1.27)  we now  p•et
d P            2 p

(b)  Solve for  P(t), and  find  the lifetime of  the particle  in terms of  r.

Problem 1.16  Show  that


for any  two (norinalizable) solutions  to the Schrdding•er  equation, *i   and  Ta.


+(i0)=  0.       otherwise.
(a)   Determine  the normalization  constant  A.
e expectation  va ue o       ‹at  tune  r  =
(c)   What  is  the  expectation  value  of  p  (at  time  r  =   0)?  (Note  that  you  c'oiiiior 
get  it  from  p      ni d\.v) Jdt.  Why  not?)



(f)   Find  the  uncei‘tainty  in .r  (w, ).




(g)   Find  the uncertainty  in  p (‹r  ).
(h)   Check  that  your results  are consistent  with  the  uncertainty  principle.


wave1en•th  of  the  particle  in question  th l p) is p•reaier  than  the characteristlc size of  
the  system  (d). In  thermal  equilibrium  at  (Kelvin)  temperature  T,  the  averap•e kinetic  
energy  of  a particle  is



(where  kB  is Boltzmann's  constant),  so the typical  de Broglie  wavelength  is

[I .41 j

The  purpose  of  this  problem  is  to anticipate  which  systems  will  have  to  be  ti‘eated 
quantum  mechanically,  and  which can  safely  be described  classically.

temperature  below which the free" electi oiis in a solid are quantum mechan- ical. Below  what  
temperature  are the trim/ei  in  a solid  quantum  mechanical?

n/n!a›’s  quantum  mechanical;  the  nuclei  are aliTlost  netter  quantum  mechani- cal. The same 
goes for liquids  (for’ which the interatonuc  spacing is roughly
ice sane    wi       eoexcep       o    e i   n   e ow         n
(b)   teases.  For  what  teiiiperatures  are  the  atoms  in  an  ideal  gas  at  pressure  P 
qumituin  mechanical?  Hiim.-  Use  the  ideal  gas  law  (PV  —  Nk pT)   to deduce the  
interatoniic   spacinp•.   Aust i ei .   T   <   (1/kp)(/i   /3ni)“’5P-'".  Obviously (for the gas 
to show quantum  behavior)  we want ix  to be as stir  ill  as possible.

pressure.  Is hydrogen  in outer space  (wheie  the interatonuc  spacuig•  iS about 1  clTi and  
the  temperature  is 3 K) quantum  iiiechanical?








'* lit  a  sr›lid  llJc  innci”  elecli"on.s  are  attitchcd  tu  a  ptii°ticultH-  nucleus.  and  
lui“  them  llJc  rclcv‹inl size  \v‹›uld  he  the  ntdius  of”  the  atum.  But  the  uutei iTiosl 
 elections  ai‘e  not  tilt:tclicJ.  ttnJ  l‹x°  flicln  the



















SCHRODINGER  EQUATION





In  Chapter 1  we  talked  a  lot  about  the  wave  function,  and  how  you  rise  it  to 
calculate various quantities of  interest. The time  has come  to stop procrastinatinp•,

Ji,ir  place?  We  need  to solve  the Schrodinger  equation,

[2.1]


van
o   a s    c   e    pote i  a
c  ap er   an    n os   o      i     oo        s  a

solved by the method of separation of variables (the physicist’s first line of attack on any 
pai‘tial diffei'ential equation): We look for solutions that are simple pi odticts,

2.2

w  eie                 case   is a     n   io   o      a one  an        s a    n    o   o     a one 
    n


' lt   is  tiresome   to  keep  saying     pt›tential  energy   f'uiiction."   so  most   people  
just  call   V   the “potential,”   even   though   this  invites   tu•Nasional   confusion   with  
rf‹•c-rric-   potential.   which   is  itctually poteiiti‹il  energy  ;›‹•r  tinit  ‹li irge.

SeCffofl 2. I:    Statioitar y  States           25

subset of all solutions in this way. But hang on, because the solutions we to  obtain turn out  to 
be of  p•reat interest. Moreover  (as is typically  the  case  with  separation of  variables)  we  
will  be  able  at  the end  to  patch  tog•ether  the separable  solutions in such  a way as to 
construct  the most general solution.
or separa   e so utions we   ave
aw                                   

(ordinai y  derivatives,  now), and  the Schriidinger  equation  reads



Or, dividing  through  by Jp:

ih                                               + *                       [2.3]
Now,  the  left  side  is  a  function  of  r  alone,  and  the  right  side  is  a  function  of x 
 alone.'  The  only  way  this  can  possibly  be  true  is  if  both  sides  are  in  fact 
roit5roiir—otherwise, by  varying  r, I could  change  the  left  side  without  touching the right 
 side,  and  the two  would  no 1onp•er  be equal.  (That's a subtle  but  crucial argument,  so if 
it‘s new to you, be sure to pause and think it through.) For reasons that  will appear in a moment, 
 we shall  call  the separation  constant  E. Then
1 dq




dt
and


2ni      dx'-



2rt  d.v

Separation of variables has turned a pat'tial  differential equation  into two oidi-
iioi3  differential equations (Equations 2.4 and 2.5). The first of these (Equation 2.4)

-Note  that  this  would  nor  be  true  if  V  were  a  function  of’ f  as  well  as .r.

Time-Independent Schr‘odinger  Equntion

is easy to solve (just multiply  through  by dt  and integrate);  the general solution is C exp(—i 
Mr/fi), but we might as well absorb the constant C into    (since the quantity of interest is the 
product Jp), Then

[2.G]

The  second  (Equation  2.5) is called  the time-independent Schriidinger  equation;
we  can  go  no  further  with  it  until  the  potential   V(x)  is  specified.
The  rest   of   this  chapter   will   be  devoted  to  solving   the  time-independent 
Schriidinger   equation,   for  a   variety   of   simple   potentials.   But   before  I   get   
to that   you   have  every   right   to  ask:   What’s   so   great   ahout   seynrahl€   
SOlutions? After  all,  most   solutions   to  the  (time  dependent)  Schrodinger   equation  do  
nol take  the  form  /(.r)p(r).  I  offer  three  answers—two  of  them  physical,  and  one

1.  They  are stationary  states.  Although  the  wave function  itself,

t x, r) =   f(x)e"“‘''",                                       [2.7]



[2.8j

does nor—the  time-dependence cancels out.3 The  same  thing  happens  in calculat-
ings  the expectation  value  of any  dynamical  variable;  Equation  1.36 reduces  to


h  d
i  dx

f  dx.                           [2.9]

Ever y expectation  value is c'o/75rftfir  in time, we might as well drop  the factor  p(r) 
altogether,  and simply  use      in place of  T.  (Indeed, it is common  to refer to     as

important  to remember  that  the true  wave  function  always  carries  that  exponential
time-dependent  factor.)  In  particular,  (.  )  is  constant,  and  hence  (Equation  1.33)

2.  They  are  states  of  definite  totnl  energy.  In  classical  mechanics,  the  total energy  
(kinetic  plus  potential)  is called  the Hamiltonian:


r
2w

3For normalizable  solutions.  E  must  be  real  (see Problem  2.1(a)).

[2.10]




The  corresponding  Hamiltonian  oper citoi,  obtained  by  the  canonical  substitution
p  —›  (h/ i)(b/b.x),  is  therefore

[2.11]






and  the expectation  value of  the  total energy  is

dx  ——  E
[2.12]


2.13

(Notice  that  the  normalization  of  T  entails  the  normalization  of  J.)   Moreover,



and  hence


So the  variance  of  N  is

H2                                 dx  ——  E‘.




[2.14]
But  remember,           =   0,  then  every  member  of  the  sample  must  share  the  same ue    
  e     s         ion    as   ero  sprea         on   us o          sep   a   e  so u   on    as    
 e property   that  eider y  inenstii ement  of  the  total  eneig;  is  certain  to  return  the  
»nlue
E.  (That's  why  I  chose  that  letter  for  the  separation  constant.)
3.   1“he  general  solution  is  a  linear  combination  of  separable  solutions.   As we're 
about  to discover,  the  time-independent Schri›dinger  equation  (Equation  2.5) yields  an  
infinite  collection   of  solutions  (f    [x),  J2(x),   J3(x), ...   ),  each   with its  
associated  value  of  the  separation  constant  (E   , Ez. E;,  ...   );  thus  there  is  a

(x)e                                      2ix)e
Now  (as  you  can  easily  check  for  yourself)  the  (time-dependent)  Schrodinger equation  
(Equation  2.1)  has the property  that any  linear combination⁵ of  solutions

"Whenever  confusion  might  arise. I’11  put  a “hat” (‘) on  the  operator.  to ciisting•uish  it 
 from  the dynamical  variable  it  represents.




where  ‹ ; . ‹'            are  any  (complex)  constants.

28        Chapter 2    Time-Independent Schr”odinger Eyr/orioif

is  itself  a  solution.  Once  we  have  found  the  separable  solutions,  then,  we  can 
immediately  construct a much more general  solution, of  the form




It  so  happens  that  every   solution  to  the  (time-dependent)  Schrodinger  equation

(c; ,  <z.     . ) so as to fit  the initial  conditions  for  the  problem  at hand.  You'll  see 
in the following  sections how all this works out in practice, and in Chapter 3 we'll

the  time-independent Schrfidinger  equation,  you're essentially  done’, getting from there  to  
the  general  solution  of  the  time-dependent  Schrfidinger  equation  is,  in

A  lot  has  happened  in  the  last  four  pap•es,  so  let  me  recapitulate,  from  a somewhat  
different  perspective. Here's the generic problem:  You're given a (time- independent)  potential  
V(x),  and  the startlng  wave functlon  W(.r. 0);  your  job is to find the wave function,  T(z, 
r), for any subsequent time r. To do this you  must solve  the  (time-dependent) Schrodinger  
equation  (Equation  2.1).  The  strategy⁶ is first to solve the time-independent Schri›dinger 
equation (Equation  2.5); this yields,

associated  energy  (£; ,  E  ,  £3-.-   . ).  To  fit  U(x, 0)  you  write  down  the  g•enera1 
linear combination  of  these solutions:




the  miracle  is that  you  can nlwn; s  match  the  specihed  initial  state  by appropriate 
choice of  the constants  rt,  c„  r3, ...   . To construct  T(.v. r) you  simply  tack onto each  
term its characteristic time dependence,  exp(—i E„i //i):



[2.17]



The separable solutions  themselves,

[2.18]

*Occasionally  you  can  solve  the  time-dependent  Scl rodin•er  equation  without  recourse  to 
scp- aratinn  of  variables—see. for  instance. Problem.s  2.49 and  2.TO.  But  such cases ‹uc 
cxtremely  r«rc.

Section 2. 1:   Stationary  States          29

are  stationer‘;!  states,  in  the  sense  that  all  probabilities  and expectation  values  are

solution  (Equation  2.17).  the energies  are different,  for  different  stationary  states, and  
the exponentials  do not cancel,  when  you  calculate  |'I  |-.

Example 2.1     Suppose  a  particle  starts  out  in  a  linear  combination  of  just  nvo 
stationary  states:


'      (To  keep  thinp•s  simple  I'll  assume  that  the constants  c„  and  the states  J„(.r)  
are reel.) What is the wave function  T (.i‘. r) at subsequent  times? Find  the probability 
density,  and  describe its motion.
Solution:  The  first  part  is easy:
(v, ›) =    I ii   (.x)e°'    '!    -1- c_ f   (z)e    £’
where  2i1  and  £2  are the energ•ies  associated  with       and  J2.  It  follows  that



(I used Euler's formula,  exp i8 =  cos 8 -1- t  sin 8, to simplify  the result.) Evidently the 
probability  density  oscillate.s  sinusoidally,  at an angular frequency  (Ez — E  )/fi; this  is 
certainl    nor  a stationary  state. But  notice  that  it  took  a ltnecii’  coitibiiiatioit of  
states  (with  different  energies)  to produce  motion.⁷

»Problem 2.1  Prove  the  following  three  theorems:
(a)   For  normalizable  solutions,  the  separation  constant  €   must  be  i'ectl.  Htitt. Write 
 £  (in  Equation  2.7)  as  £o +  t r   (with  Eo and  P  real),  and  show  that if Equation  
1.20  is  to  hold  for  all  i,  r   must  be  zero.

(unlike  T(.r, r),  whlch  is necessarily  complex).  This doesn't  mean that every solution  to  
the  time-independent  Schrddinger  equation  is  real;  what  it  says is  that  if  you’ve  got  
one  that  is  nor,  it  can  always  be  expressed  as  a  linear combination  of  solutions  
(with  the  same  energy)  that  ui e.  So  you  iiiig/ir  ns V ell   stick  to  J's     that  are  
real.   Slim  If  /(.r)  satisfies  Equation  2.5.  for  a given  E,   so  too  does  its  
coiiiplex  conjugate,  and  hence  also  the  real  linear


This   is   nicely   illustrated   by   an   applet   at   the   Web  site   
http://thorin.adnc.coin/   topquark/ quantum/deepwellmain.html.


30          Ch‹ipter 2    Time-Independent Scht !odinger  Eqti ation

(c)  If V(x) is an even function  (that is, V(—x)      V(z)) then     (x) can always be  taken  to  
be either even  or odd.  firm.  If  /(z)  satisfies  Equation  2.5,  for

combinations

+Prob1em  2.2  Show  that  E  must  exceed  the  minimum  value  of  V(s).  for  every normalizable 
 solution  to  the  time-independent Schrodinger  equation.  What  is  the

evclassic    analog  to  his sta
eRew   te Equation n2         he   o
d.               2
that such  a function  cannot  be normalized.
2.2   THE INFINITE SQUARE WELL

p(  )           0,      if 0 < .v  < a. otherwise
[2.19]

(Figure 2.1). A particle in this potential  is completely  free, except  at the two ends (x  =  0 
and .   =  c), where an infinite  force prevents  it from escaping.  A classical model  would  be a 
cart on  a frictionless  horizontal  air  track,  with  perfectly  elastic bumpers—it  just keeps  
bouncing  back  and  forth  forever.  (This  potential  is artifi- cial,  of  course,  but  I  urge 
 you  to  treat  it  with  respect.  Despite  its  simplicity—or rather,  precisely  he‹’au.se  of  
its  simplicity—it  serves  as  a  wonderfully  accessi-

fre  uentl








FIGURE 2.1:    The infinite square well poten-
tia  (Equation  2.19




Outside  the  well,     (x)  =   0 (the  probability  of  finding  the  particle  there  is zero).  
 /flSfde   the  well,  where   V  =   0,  the  time-independent  Schrtidinger  equation (Equation  
2.5) reads



or
d-’f 
dx2
li -’  d’f
2nt  dx -’

—k   f.      where k         2    E
h
f2 201


[2.21]

Ry  writing  i1  in  this  way,  I  have  tacitly  assumed  that   F   >   II   we  know  from 
Problem  2.2  that  E  < 0 won't  work.)  Equation  2.21 is the classical  simple har- monic 
oscillato( equation;  the general  solution is

9(x) =  A sin k.  +  B cos k.v,                                [2.22]

boundary  conditions  of  the  problem.  What  are  the  appropriate  boundary  con- ditions  for   
  (.r)?  Ordinarily,  both      end  d f/ix  are  continuous,  but  where  the po      i    goes  o 
     ni y o   y         rs  o     ese app                r   e    ese   oun     y conditions,  and 
account  for the exception  when  P =  en, in Section  2.5; for now I hope you  will  trust  me.)
ontinuity  o            requires  t  at

[2,23]

so as to join onto the solution outside the well. What does this tell  us about  A and
B? Well,

(0)      A sin0 -1-  B cus 0     B.

so  B —— 0, and  hence
sin

Then     (r)  =  A sinko, so  either  A  ——  0  (in  which  case  we're  left  with  the  triv- ial 
    no   no    a i  able    solution     (  )       0)   or  else  s              0   w   c      
eans

[2.25]

But  k  =   0  is  no  good  (again,  that  would  imply     (.i)  =   0),  and  the  negative 
solutions    ive  nothin    new   since  sin                             and  we  can  absorb  the 
minus sign into  A. So the distinct  solutions  are

32         Ch‹ipter 2    Time-Independent Schr‘odirtger  Etration







FIGURE 2.2:    The first three stationary states of theinfinitesquare well (Equation 2.28).

Curiously,  the  boundary  condition  at  x      a  does  not  determine  the constant
A, but rather the constant  k,  and  hence the  possible values of  E.’


[2.27]


In  radical  contrast  to  the  classical  case,  a  quantum  particle  in  the  infinite  square 
well cannot  have  just any  old  energy—it  has  to  be one of  these  special  allowed values.⁸ 
To find  A, we normalise   f:

r«’
J0

A   sin-(kx) d.v =  | A|²    =  1,     so     A    — 2
This only determines the magnitude  of  A, but it is simplest to pick the positive real root:  A —— 
    2/      (the  phase  of  A carries  no  physical  significance  anyway). Inside the well,  
then, the solutions  are

2 sin                                                      [2.28]

As  promised,   the  time-independent  Schriidinger   equation  has  delivered   an infinite  set 
of solutions (one  for each  positive  integer n). The first  jew  of these are plotted in Figure  
2.2, They look just like the standing  waves on a string of length u; tl.    which  carries  the  
lowest  energy,  is called  the  ground  state,  the others,  whose enemies  increase  in  
proportion  to ii   , are called excited states.  As a collection,  the functions  /„(x)  have  
some  interesting  and  imponant  properties:
1.  They  are  alternately  even  and  odd,  with  respect  to  the  center  of  the  well:
is even,         is odd,  /3  is even,  and  so on.

'Notice  that  the quantizalion  o1’ energy  emerged as a rather  technical  consequence  of  the 
bound- ary  con‹iiiions  on  solutions  io  ihc  iime-inaepenaeni  ociiriiainger  equaiion.
To  make  this  symmetry  more  apparent.  some  authors  center  the  well  at  the  origin  
(running  it i'rom  —ri  to +ii   j. The even  functions  are  then  cosines.  :ind  the  odd ones  
are  sines.  See Problem  2.36.



2.  As  you  go  up  in energy,  each  successive  state  has  one  more  node  (zero-

SO  OH.
3.  They are mutually  orthogonal,  in the sense  that





whenever  m     n. Pt oo



1    "
—              COS
. n
1


2


ci                                    n







it  fails?)  In  that  case  normalization  tells  us that  the  integral  is 1. In fact,  we can 
combine orthogonality  and  normalization  into a single statement:¹⁰


[2.30]



where  6„„,  (the  so-called  Kronecker  delta)  is defined  in the  usual  way,

0,     if iii  /  o:
1.     if m      n.
We say  that  the    "s are orthonormal.


[2.31]
4.  They  are  complete,  in  the  sense  that  any  other   function,     (.r),  can  be expressed 
 as a linear combination  of them:





.     (•“ )    '



”it      All       (•“   )    '
*i—I
2 Z c„ sin   '    .r)                    [2.32]

'*In this casc the \r/ “s we re‹iI. so thc ”  nn /„,  is unnecessary. but Vol future purposes it's 
a good idea to get in the habit nf putting it therc.




I'm not about to prone  the completeness of the functions sin (us.i /r), but if you've s     ie   a 
        e   ca   u us you  wi    re  og     e    a     q  a  on           s no   ing          e 
Fourier  series for  f(.v), and  the fact  that  “any” function  can  be expanded  in  this way is 
sometimes  called  Dirichlet's  theorem.' '
l'he coefficients  c   can be evaluated—for  a given   f(v) —by  a  method  I call both  sides of 
Equation  2.32 by  J„, (.r)*, and  integrate.
[2.33]

(Notice  how  the  Kronecker  delta  kills  every  term  in  the  sum  except  the  one  for

shw  ie       =               us     e
ocien   in     e expa   s on o
eis


[2.34]


These four properties  are extremely  powcrful,  and  they  are not  peculiar to the infinite  
square  well.  The  first  is  truc  whenever  the  potential  itself  is  a  symmetric

onality  is also quite general—I'll show  you  the proof  in Chapter 3. Completeness holds  for  
all  the  potentials  you  are  likely  to encounter,  but  the proofs  tend  to  be

ho  e for the best.
The stationary  states (Equation  2.18) of  the infinite square  well are evidently



I  claimed  fEquation  2.17)  that  the  most  general  solutirin  tn  the  (time-dependent) 
Schrodinger equation  is a linear combination  of stationary  states:

“"“‘ '.                  [2.36]


'  See.  for  example,  Mai'y  Beas.  Ivl‹itli‹•iii‹iiicnI v\fear//r›‹/,Y iii  ilie  Plij›sic‹il  
S‹‘ieiices.  2d  cut.  (New York: John  Wile},  1983),  p. ? 13:  ,/”(.?)  can e ’en  have a  
flnite  numbcr  ‹›l’ fiMitc discontinuities.
' -It   doesn't  matter  whether  you  use  iii  or  ii  as  the  “dummy  index”  here  (as  long  
as  you  are consistent  on  the  two sides  o1’ the  cquation.  o1’ course): i whatever  lettel  
yoil  use.  it  just  stands  ioi  “any positive  intcgcr.”
See.   foi'  example,   Julin  L.  Powell   ‹ind   Bend  Crasu•m:Ann,   g//r////ifH/  
i\'fecItniiic'.s   (Addison- Wesley,  Rcadlng.  MA.  1961),  p.  126.



(If  you  doubt  that  this  is  a  solution,  by  all  means  check  it!)  It  remains  only  for




n=l

The completeness  of the    ’s (confirmed  in this case  by Dirichlet's  theorem  guar- antees  
that  I  can  always  express  T(.v. 0)  in  this  way,  and  their  orthonorrnality


[2.37]

That  does  it: Given  the  initial  wave  function,  T(.r. 0),  we  first  compute  the expansion 
coefficients c„, usinp• Equation  2.37, and then plug• these into Equation  2.36

dynamical  quantities of interest,  usinp• the procedures  in Chapter 1. And  this same ritual 
applies to any  potential—the  only things that chanp•e are the functional form



Example 2.2    A  particle  in  the infinite square well  has the initial  wave function T(.r. 0) = 
 Ax(a  — .v).     (0 < .r  < u).
or  so ne cons an       ( ee     •ure      )            e     e  we     o   co    e                 
  n


’t’(x, 0)






Solution:  First  we  need  to determine   A,  by  normalizing  T(.r. 0):



SO





The  with  coefficient  is (Equation  2.37)




.r sin         .v) d.v  —        x² sin  "     .v) d.x









nx)-—2
cos(nx) +n”' f»x)*


0.                      if ii  is even.
8       /(cix)".    if n  is odd.


1

COS(/f7T )  +   ig                    cos(0)




Loosely  speaking,  c„  tells  you  the  “amount  of  J”    that  is  contained  in  T.” Some  
people  like  to  say  that  |c„ |-  is  the  “probability  of  finding  the  particle  in  the 
with  stationary  state,”  but  this  is  bad  1anp•uage;   the  particle  is  in  the  state  T,   
nor
,  ,  and,  anyhow,  in  the  laboratoi y  you  don”t  “hnd  a particle  to  be  in  a  particular 
state”—you  men.sure   some  oh.sein'cihle,  and  what  you  p•et  is  a  ni,ini6er.  As  we'll see 
 in  Chapter  .3,  what   c        tells  you  is the  yrolaahilij'  r/ter ri  rweci.suremeiit of 
the

Section  2.2:  The Itiflnite  Sqrrare Well          37

energ y wotild    ield the  value  Egg  (a competent  measurement  will  always  return  ‹site of  
the  “allowed”  values—hence  the  name—and  |c„|-  is the probability  of  getting the yorricu/or  
value  E„).
Of course,  the  sum  of  these  probabilities  should  be  1,


f2.38]



so I'm eoinp• to do the proof for r      0; if this bothers you. you can easily generalize
the argument  to arbitrary  r).









(Again,  the Kronecker delta  picks out  the tenn ix  =  ii  in the summation  over iii.)
Mureuver,  the expectation  value of  the energy  must  be


[2.39]


and  this too can  be checked  directly:  The  time-independent  Schrodinger equation (Equation  
2.12) says







Notice that the probability of q•ettinp• a particular enerp•y is independent of tline, and so, a 
for tiori, is the expectation value of H. This is a nianifestatlon of conservation of energy  in 
quantum  mechanics.


38         Chapter 2    Time-J›idepetidetit Schrâdinger  Equation


a   pe             i      aipe          esa    ng    ave     nc  on     ig  re           oseyre 
seinbles the ground state       (Figure   2.2). This suggests that |rt  |-  should dominate, and  
in fact







e e  pec a  on    a   e o      e ener•y    n         exa   p e    s
8            '  ii'n'/:'        480ti²                    1          5h

As one mip•ht expect, it is very close to E    =  x   # -/2inr‘ —slip•htly  larger, because of  the 
 admixture  of  excited  states.


eds
ro    e                  ow     a      e
no  accep a   e  so      on   o     e         e   n  epen  en

special case of the general  theorem  in Problem 2.2,  but  this tiiTle do it  by explicitly 
solving  the Schrodinger  equation,  and  showing  that  you cannot  meet  the boundary

sProblem 2.4  Calculate  {.r), (.r-),  (p),    ›-), o  , and    p, for the with  stationary  state 
state  comes closest  to the  uncertainty  llmit'?

eqn
ro    e                  p     ie e   n
e   q i  re  we      as  as              a   wa  e   unc   on





'   You  can  look  up  the series


1"      3*’      5*’                960



I’   +   1’   “      “   +  ” ” ” "     96
in  math  ttiblcs.  undci  "durns of" Rccigrncal  Powci s" or "Rieniann  Zct‹i Function."



(a)   Normalize   W (z,   0).  (That  is,  find   A.  This  is  very  easy,  if  you  exploit   the


explicitly  after  doing  part  (b).)
(b)   Find  T(.r, r)  and  |T(z, r)|'.   Express  the  latter  as  a  sinusoidal  function  of 
time,  as in  Example  2.1.  To simplify  the  result,  let  in      x   ft /2in‹i-.
(c)   Compute  (.  ). Notice that  it oscillates  in tlme. What is the angular  frequency

is  greater  than  u/2. go directly  to jail.)
..   -                                         ..

(e)   If  you  measured  the  energy  of  this  particle,  what  values  might  you  get,  and whal 
 is  the  probability  of  gettii1p•  each  of  them?  Find  the  expectation  value of  H. How  
doe.s it compare  with  E   and  Ez*


physical significance (it cancels out whenever you calculate a measurable quantity), the  relative  
phase  of  the coefficients  in  Equation  2.17  does  matter.  For example,
ppos



results  with  what  you  got  before.  Study  the  special  cases  Q  =   u/2  and  Q  =   x. (For 
 a g•raphical  exploration  of  this problem  see  the  applet  in  footnote  7.)


+Problem 2.7   A  particle  in  the  infinite  square  well  has  the  lnitlal  wave  function

T(.  . 0) —

(a)   Sketch  T(.  . 0),  and determine  the constant   A.
(b)   Find  T(.  . r).

''There   is   no   restriction   in   principle   on   the   slinf›e   of   tile   stni ting   
wavc   I"unctioiJ.   as   long as   it   is   nnrmalizablc.    In   pai licul‹ir.   T(.   . 0)   
need   nnt   have   a   continuous   derivative—in    fact,   it docsn' I   even    Isaac    tc   
be   a   c’oii/iii//oi/x    Function,    However.    i1”   yuu    ti y    lu   calculatc    (H)     
using T(.i. 0)*//T(.t. 0) z/.\  in  such  a  case.  you  may  encounlci   tcchnical  difficultie.s. 
 because  the  .secnnd derivative  nf  T(.   . 0) i.s  ill-defined.  Ic  wol'ks  in  Problcm  2.9 
because  the discontinuicics occur  at  che end points.  where  the  wavu  t"unction  is  zero  
anyway.  In Problem  2.48  you’II  see  how  lo  manage  cases  like
Cn1

e                     o     g       qtia ion

(c)   What  is  the  probability  that  a  measurement  of  the  energy  would  yield  the value  E 
*
(   )     ind   he expec ation   a1  e of   he energy


out in  the left  half  of  the  well, and  is (at  r  =   0) equally  likely  to  be found  at any 
point  in that  region.
(a)  What  is  its  initial  wave function,  T(.v. 0)? (Assume  it  is real. Don't  forget to 
normalize  it.)
(   )   Wha   is   he  probabili  y  tha   a  measure   en   of   he  energy     ould  yield   he
value  u-ft   /2ni a-?

Problem 2.9  For the wave function in Example  2.2, find  the expectation  value of
H, at  time  r =  0, the “old fashioned”  way:



Compare  the result obtained  in Example  2.3. Note.  Because  (H) is independent  of time, there 
is no loss of  generality  in using r =  0.


2.3  THE HARMONIC OSCILLATOR

of force constant  k. The motion  is governed  by Hooke's  law.






ere



is the (anp•ular)  frequency  of  oscillation. The potential  energy  is
V(.v) —  1
2


[2.42]
s grap   is a para

Section 2.3.-  The Harmonic  Oscill‹itor          41












FIGURE 2.4:    Parabolic  approximation  (dashed  curve)  to  an  arbitrary  potential,  in the 
neighborhood  of a local minimum.
Of  course,  there's  no  such  thing  as  a   ›erféct  harmonic  oscillator—if  you

long  before  that  point  is  reached.  But  practically  any  potential  is  approximately 
parabolic,  in  the  neighborhood  of  a  local  minimum  (Figure  2.4).  Formally,  if  we expand  
V(.r)  in  a Taylor series about  the  minimum:
1
0)    +     2

subtract  V(ro)  (you  can  add  a constant  to  V(.i)  with  impunity,  since  that doesn't change 
the force), recog•nize  that  V'(.ro) =  0 (since .ro is a minimum), and drop the higher-order  
terms  (which  are  negligible as long as  (.r  —  ro) stays  small),  we get
r(.r›3   jv (.,o›(, — •o›'.
which describes  simple  harmonic  oscillation  (about  the point -to). with an effective spring  
constant  k       V“(xo) '    That's  why  the  simple  harmonic  oscillator  is  so important:  
Virtually  city  oscillatory  motion  is  approximately  simple  harmonic,  as long as the 
amplitude  is small.
The qiioiiiiini  problem  is to solve  the Schrodinger  equation  for the potential

[2.41]
(it  is custolnary  to eliminate  the spring  constant  in  favor  of  the classical  frequency, 
usinp•  Equation  2.41).  As  we  have  seen,  it  suffices  to  solve  the  time-independent 
Schriidinger  equation:

2                                                                      [2.44]
'"Note  that  V”(.rp j >  ().  since  by  assumption  .rp  is a iiiiiiiiiiiiiii. Only  in  the rare 
c‹ise  V”(.vq) =   II is  the oscillation  not  even  approxirn‹itely  siiriple  li.irmonic.


42            Chapter  2     Tftll€-Indepetident  Schrâdinger  E friction

In  the  literature  you  will  find  two  entirely  different  approaches  to  this  problem.

dub
T  e    rs   is  a  straigh   o
e   o ce    solu   on   o     e  d    eren   a   equa   on
using  the  power  series  method:  it  has  the  virtue  that  the  same  strategy  can  be 
applied  to  many  other  potentials  (in  fact,  we'll  use  it  in  Chapter 4  to  treat   the 
Coulomb  potentlal).  The  second  is a diabolically  clever  algebraic  technique,  using 
so-called  ladder  operators.  I'll  show  you  the  algebraic  method  first,  because  it  is 
quicker  and  simpler  (and  a  lot  more  fun):'7  if  you  want  to  skip  the  power  series 
method  for  now,  that's  fine,  but  you   should  certainly   plan  to  study  it  at  some


2.3.1   Algebraic Method
o   egln  wi        e   s   ewr  e    q  a  o              n  a     o e  sugges     e   o

[2.45]



2.46

ese  were     f      e          wou       e easy


Here,  however,  lt's  not  quite  so simple,  because  p  and  a  are  oper ators, and  oper- 
ators  do  not,  in  g•enera1,  commute  (.rJ›  is  not  the  same  as  p.i).  Still,  this  does



[2.47]


Ithe  factnr  in  front  is  just  there  tn  make  the  final  results  1nnk  nicer).
Well,  what  is  the  product  o   ‹/+?
i
cix ci+ =   2fiinm (ip  +  mui.v)(—i J› -l- m‹ux )
1



We”II elicountcr  snme nf the sanic str‹tlegies in tlic tlicniy oI” singular momentum (Chapter 4), 
and tlic tcclznique  geneI"il|iZCs  to a brnad Uaib tel' potentials in super-symmetric quantum 
znecbaoics (ccc. l\ i  example. Ricl1‹irct W. Robinctt. 6/i/‹r////u / M‹•‹-liniiic.s. (Ox1t›id 
U.P.. New Yc›rk.  1997). Section 14.4),

Section 2.3:  The H‹U  noxic Os6i/frtfor         4

As  anticipated,  there's  an  extra  term,  involving  (.ip —  p.v).  We call  this  the  com- 
mutator of x and  p; it  is a measure of how  badly  they QoiI  to commute. In general, the  
commutator  of  operators  A  and  B  (written  with  square  brackets)  is


In  this notation,

[2.49]


notoriously  slippery  to  work  with  in  the  abstract,  and  you  are  bound  to  make mistakes  
unless  you  glve  them  a “test  function.”  J’(.v),  to act  on. At  the end  you can throw away 
the test functlon, and you'll  be left with an equation  involvlng  the

i=  rd IN.v   ——      f  d  (f) _  f  *(     f)   —— I
[2.50]
Dropping  the  test  function,  which has served  its purpose,




This  lovely  and  ubiquitous  result  is known  as  the canonical  commutation  rela-
tion.'
With  this, Equation  2.49  becomes




or
H  —— liu›   as!+!
2

— })                                        [2.53]

Evidently the Hanultonian  does iioi factor perfectly—there's that extra — l/2    on the right. 
Notice that the ordering of o+ and a    is important  here; the same argument. with o+  on the 
left, yields

[2.54]

In  particular,
[2.55]

'   In a deep sense all of the mysteries of quantum  mechanics  can be traced  to the fact  that 
position and  momentum  ‹lo  not  commute.  Indeed,  some  authors  take  the  canonical  
comrnutation  rcl•ition  ‹is  an axiom  of  the  theory.  and  use  it  to det time   y      (Ii  f 
i j‹1 J‹lx.

pt                            p        k     c    o     ger    quation

So the Hainiltonian  can  equally  well  be written

[2.56]



the  tomb
[2.57]

(in equations  like this you read the upper signs all the way across, or else the lower

Now,  here  comes  the  crucial  step:  I  claim  that  if   f   satisfies  the  St'lii âdingei 
eqi,iatioit  ii›illi  eitei g;  E,   (that  is:  H f        E f),   then  o+ f   satisfies  the  
Sclirâdinger ecy,imi







(I  used  Equation  2.55  to  replace  u   a+  by  a+n    + 1,  in  the  second  line.  Notice

any  cm.iiriiit5—such  as ft,  m.  and  €—does  iiof,  an  operator  coniiuutes  with  any 
constant.)
y  t  e same  to  en. n       is a so ution  wit   energy







Here,  then,  is  a  wonderful  machine  for  p•eneratinp•  new  solutions,  with  higher  and 
lower  energies—if   we  coidd  just   find  ONe   Solution,   to  poet  started!  We  call  a 
ladder  onerators,  hecause  they  allriw  us  tn  climb  up  and  dnwn  in  energy:  o+  is the    
raising  operator,  and  os   the  lowering  operator.  The  “ladder”  of  states  is illustrated  
in Fip•ure  2.5.

Section 2.J:  The Harmonic  Osci.llator           Añ

E






























0





But  wait!  What  if  I  apply  the  lowering  operator  repeatedly'?  Eventually  I'm

theorem  in  Problem 2.2)  does  not  exist!  At  some  point  the  machine  must  fail. How  can  
that  happen?  We  know  that  u        is  a  new  solution  to  the  Schriidinger equation,  but  
ther e  is no Luca oiitee  that  it  ivil,l, be normalizable —it  might  be  zero, or its 
square-integral mig•ht  be infinite.  In practice  it  is  the former:  There  occurs  a “lowest  
rung” (call  it  to)   such  that

[2.58]


We  can  use  this  to determine  to(«):


d
dx  +***-*   0'0.




or






0   *#*
*O
.x d.v             ln t0  =
-1- constant.




We might  as well  normalize  it  right  away:







1/4




ozs
o    e e  n ne     e energy
a e  we  p   g 1    n o     e    c    o   nger e  ua  on    n

*- 0=0:

With nur frint  now  securely  planted rin  the bottrim  rung (the ground  state of the
quantum  oscillator),  we  simply  apply  the  raisinp•  operator  (repeatedly)  to  g•enerate
e exe  e    s aes,      n  reasing     e energy    y         w      eac    s ep

wit

w  ere          s     e  no     a    a ion  cons an       y  app ylng     e r   s ng  opera or   
repea edly)  t     ¥-o.  then,  we  can  (in  principle)  construct   all-'   the  stationary   
states  of

‘'In  t)ie  case of the harmonic  oscillator  it  is customary.  for some  reason.  to depart  
front  the usual piacticc.  and  number  the states  starting  with ii  =  0,  in.steacl  of n  =   
1. Obviously,  the  lower  limit  on  the suln  in  a  formula  such  as Equation  2.17  should  be 
 altered  accordingly.
-'  Note  thal  we obtain   ill  the (normalixable) sotutions  by  this procedure.  For  it  there  
were some other  solution.  we  could  generate  lmm  it  a  second  ladder.  by  repeated  
application  of  the  raising  and lowerinp•  operators.  But  the  bottom  rung  of  this  new  
ladder  would  have  to  satisfy  Equation  2.58.  and since  I hal  leatls  inexnrably   tn  
Frjilatinii  *  59   ihe  bntlnna  rungs  wniild  hr  the  same   find  hence  I he  I xvn ladders  
would  in  facl  be  identical.

Sectioti 2.3:  The Harmonic Oscillator         47

the  harmonic  oscillator.  Meanwhile,  without  ever  doing  that  explicitly,  we  have 
determined  the allowed  energies.


Exaoiple 2.4    Find  the first excited  state of  the harmonic  oscillator.
Solution:  Using Equation  2 61,



[2.62]



We can  noriTlalize  it “by  hand”:

e

so, as  it  happens,  d i  =   1.
I  wouldn't  want  to calculate  t5o  this  way  (applying  the raisinp• operator  fifty times!),  
but  never  mind:  ln pi  fllCfple  Equatlon 2.61  does  the job—except  for  the normalization.



footwork,  so watch  closely.  We know  that o + J„   is proporrioito/  to J„  +  ,


but   what   are  the  proportionality  factors,  c„   and  d„’?  First  note  that  for  “any”--


[2.64]

(In  the language  of  linear algebra, op  is  the hermitian  conjugate  of o g.)







Ol‘  course,   the   integrals   must  eat.it,  an‹l  this  means   that      (.r)  and  y(.v)  
must  go  to  zero  at


48        Chapter 2    Tittse-lndepetideiit Schr’odinger  EattH ffOIT

and  integration  by  parts  takes  ]’  |”(d g fd.  ) d.    to —  f(d   f/d.x)*,z d.x  (the 
boundary
terms  vanish,  for  the  reason  indicated  in  footnote  22),  so

d


QED
n  particu  ar,





But  (invoking  Equations  2.57 and  2.61)










But since„     and  gz„2   ;  are normalized, it follows that |r„ |-  =  ii -1- 1 and  thy |-   =  
ii,
and  hence

2.66


Thus



1                      l
'                ‘+'‘         3   2'    +’
and  so on. Clearly

[2.67]


which  is  to say  that  the  normalization  factor  in  Equation  2.61  is  A„      l/          
(in particular,  A   =  l,  confirming  oui’ result  in  Example  2.4).

As in the case of the lnfinite square well, the stationary  states of the harmonic oscinator ‹me  
orinogonai.
[2.68)

This  can  be  proved  usinp•  Equation  2.65,  and  Equation  2.64  twice—first  moving n+  and  
then  movinp• as:








Unless  ix        ii,  then,     J,*, J„  da   must  be  zero.  Orthononnality  means  that  we can 
again  use Fourier's trick (Equation  2.34)  to evaluate the coefficients,  when  we expand  T(x. 
0)  as a  linear  combination  of  stationary  states  (Equation  2.16),  and
i        i 9    •                •         i.                  i      i   •i •           i.         
                                         r                 i                                        
   i  i       •        s     i.
|       I       dJ‹tI       If                  Out Ellll         IIldt                            
rCIHCH              tHC                              CiUlU       lC           tIlC
value  E,!.

Examnle 2.5     Find  the  exnectation  value  nf  the  nntential  ener  v  in  the  with  state
of  the harmonic  oscillator. Solution:



of .r  or  p): Use the definitlon  (Equation  2.47)  to express .v  and  y  in  terms of  the 
raising and  lowering  operators:


[2.69]


In  this example  we are  interested  in .i':
•          /i     c


50         Cf›upter 2    Titre-InJepetident Scl›r’odinger  Eination

But  (ri+)-J„  is (apart  from  normalization)  J„pa,  which  is orthogonal  to  J„.    and the  
same  goes  for  (o   )* J„,    which  is  proportional  to  J„    2.  So  those  terms  drop out,  
and  we  can  use Equation  2.65  tu  evaluate  the remaining  two:

—hu›
2
s        appens      e  e  pec a  o    va   e  o      e  po en   a   e iergy    s  exa     y        
       e rr›tnl   (the  rather  hslf,   nf  oriiirce,   i c  lrinetio)    Thi <  i*  a  peoii li 
arity  nf   the  harmonic oscillator.  as  we'll  see  later  on.




onstruc
etc       o.     i.  an
0›
you exploit  the even-ness  and  odd-ness  of  the  functions,  there  is really  onlY one  
integral  left  to do.

em2.11
(a)   Compute  (x).  (y).  (.r'),  and    p'),  for  the  states  +o  (Equation  2.59)  and  J; 
(Equation  2.62), by explicit  intep•ration.  Coitimenl:  tn this and other problems

variable                    /   x  and  the constant  a       {rim›/u h)''4.
(b)   Check  the uncertainty  principle  for  these  states.
(c)   Compute  (F)  (the  average  kinetic  energy)  and    V)  (the  average  potential energ•y) 
1‘oi  these states. (No new  integration  allowed!) Is their  sum what  you


»Problem 2.12  Find (.r),  (p), (.v-), (y-), and  (T). for the with  stationary  state of the 
harmonic  oscillator,  using  the  method  of Example 2.5.  Check  that  the  uncertainty principle 
 is  satisfied.

Problem 2.13  A particle  in  the harmonic  oscillator potential  starts out  in  the state


{a)  Find  A.
l   )   Cons ruc       (i     )  and  |    (       )

Section 2. 3:  The I-Iorinoni,c  Oscillator          S 1

(c)   Find  {x)  and    p).  Don't  get  too  excited  if  they  oscillate  at  the  classical 
frequency;  what  would it have been had I specified  Tz(.v), instead of J;  (x)? Check that 
Ehrenfest's theorem (Equation  1.38) holds for this wave function.
(d)   If  you  measured  the enerp•y  of  this  particle,  what  values  might  you  get, and with  
what  probabilities?

Problem 2.14  A  particle  is  in  the  p•round  state  of  the  harmonic  oscillator  with 
rlassiral  freniienry  ni   when  suddenly  the  string  constant  qiiadniples   so ‹›i'  =   2‹›i 
without  initially  changing  the  wave function  (of course,  T   will  now  evolve  differ- 
ently,  because  the  Hamiltonian  has  changed).  What  is  the  probabillty  that  a  niea-

of  getting ñm?   Answer : 0.943.]

2.3.2  Analytic Method
We  return  now  to the Schrodinger  equation  for the harmonic  oscillator,

f:'  d2
2iii  d.i 2        2
E).                                [2.70]
and  solve  it  directly,  by  the  series  method.  Things  look  a  little  cleaner  if  we 
introduce  the dimensionless  variable
[2.71]
[2.72]
where  K  is the energ•y,  in  units of  (1/2)f:ro:
2E

Our  problem  is  to  solve  Equation  2.72,  and  in  the  process  obtain  the  “allowed”
values  of  K  (and  hence  of  E).
To  begin  with,  note  that  at  vely  1arp•e      (which  is  to  say,  at  very  larp•e  .r),    
-
completely  doirlinates  over  the constmit  K,   so in  this rep•ime

[2.74]


which  has the approximate  solution  (check  it!)
(})      Ae    °!‘ -F B c•“!°“!‘


[2.75]

Time-Independent  Scl râdinger E mation

i fie  a   term  is clearly  not  normaiizaaie  tit  oiows  up as  i r i  —'  a); the  physlcaiiy


(})   —+  (    )e     ’‘  2,      at  large  }.
lfiis sup•p•ests  that  we    peel  ott    the exponential  part,
[2.76]


in hopes that  what remains, /i($), has a simpler functional form than    (J) itself.- 
Differentiating Equation  2.77,




and

—?\    -F ( '  — I)›.).—‹' 2.

so  the Schrodinger  equation  (Equation  2.72)  becomes

[2.78]

I  propose  to  look  for  solutions  to  Equation  2.78  in  the  form  of   serve i  sei ies
in      24

[2.791

Differcntiatinp• the series term  by  tern,
dli




d2/i




-”Note  th:it  ultliuugli  we  invoked  sninc  appi oxin1atit›ns  lu   idle//›ziu   Equatit›M  
2.77.  what  ful- lt›w.s   is  c*.  nrr.  The   dc  ice   ul“  sti igging   off   the   
tisylnptutic   behavior   is   lhe   stand:u d   fil'.st   step  in the  t3owei’  serics  Metli‹›d  
 lor  solving  ‹Iifferenli‹iI  equations—see.   fen  example.  Buus  (to‹›tnote   11). Cli«gtcr  I 
*.
-    i nil  is  xncwn  . s  tne  r rooeztius  meinozt   tor  solving  a  alrrcrentiai   equation.  
/tccnrainy  fo Tayl‹›i ‘s   thcui end.   nut    rcasnnahl}‹   well-hehuvcct   ñJnction   can   be  
expizssed   as  a  power  series,  so equation  z. lb  ni'dinarily   InvuIx’c.s   no  loss  nl   
gencrallcy.   ror   conaici‹›ns  on   the  «pplic‹\bility  ol   me metlit›J.  see Bous  (lootnutc  
1.1 )  or  Gcorgc  B.  Arl1 en  wild  Hans-Jurccn  Weber.  /\Yr///tei»r/r/‹'ri/ Metlif›fls
/o/- Ph; fii‹’i. t. . fitli  cd..  Ac‹idcniic  Press.  Orlando  (2000).  Sec tion  8.5.



Putting  these  into Equation  2.78,  we find




It  follows  (from  the  uniqueness  of  power  series expansions-⁵) that  the coefficient
of  eae'li  yow•er  of     must  vanish,




and  hence that

‘“‘         (  j -F 1)(y  -I- 2)                                             [2.  1]
This  recursion  formula  is  entirely  equivalent  to  the  Schrodinger  equation.
Starting  with •o. it generates  all the even-numbered  coefficients:

12                            24
and  startinp•  with  n  , it  generates  the odd  coefficients:

(3 —  K)                       (7 — K)           (7 —  K)(3 — K)
6         '                      20       “’                  120              '
We  write  the complete  solution  as

/! (S)'     *!cvcn(      +  *ould(tJ•




is an  eveli  function  of {,  built  on ffo. and




(2.82]



is  an  odd  function,  built  on  o; .  Thus  Equation  2.8 1   detemiines  /i (})     in  terms  
of
two  arbitrary  constants  («'0and  ri; )—which  i.s just  what  we  would  expect,  for‘  a
eqseco uor  er    i   erenatial                  tions

jthe  r,ecursion  formula  becomes  (approxlmately)
2


-- Sec.  for  eXitlTl   JO.  Artfien  (footnote  24).  Section  5.7.

Time-Jndepe›iJetit Scl rodinger Equatioti

Wlth  the (approximate)  solution
C
'’       (j/2)! ’
for some constant C, and this yields (at large },  where the higher powers dominate)



Now,  if  /i  goes  like  exp({²),  then       (remember  J?—that’s  what  we're  trying  to 
calculate)  goes  like  exp(}'/2)  (Equation  2.77),  which  is  precisely  the  asymptotic 
behavior  we  dfclii 't   want.-⁶  There   is  only   one  way   to  wip•g1e  out  of  this:  For 
normalizable  solUtlons  the  power  sei res  iiiitsr  ter minute.  There  must  occur  some

truncate efr/ir•r  the series fi„.„ or  the series /'.ddi the  offier  one must  be zero from the  
start:  cl   =   0  if  x  is even,  and  «to      0  if it  is  odd).  For  physically  acceptable 
solutions,  then, Equation  2.81 requires  that
K      2o +  1.
for some  non-nep•ative  intep•er  ii, which  is to say  (referring  to Equation  2.73)  that


for ii  =  0                                      [2.83]


condition  we found  algebraically  in  Equation  2.61.
It  seems  at  first  rather  surprising   that  the  quantization  of  energy  should

equation,   but   let's   look   at   it   front   a  different   perspective.   Equation  2.70  
has solutions,  of  course,  for  on)   value  of  E  (in  fact,  it  has  ar    linearly  
independent solutions  for  every  E'  . But  almost  all  of  these  solutions  blow  up  
exponentially  at large  .v.  and  hence  are  not  normalizable.  Imagine.  for  example,  using•  
an  £   that is  slightly   less   than  one  of  the  allowed   values  (say,  0.49ñm),  and  
plotting   the solution  (Fig•ure  2.6(a)):  the  “tails'  fly  off  to  infinity. Now  try  an E  
slightly  foi;#er (say,  0.5 flip):  the  “tails”  now  blow  up  in  the  other   direction  
(Figure  2.6(b)).  As you  tweak  the  parameter  in  tiny  increments  from  0.49  to  0,51,  the  
tails  flip  over when  you  pass  through  0.5—only  at  piecise•l;’  0.5 do the tails go to zero, 
leaving
a normalizable  solution.27

—"It’s no .surprise  th‹tt  the ill-behaved  st›lutions are still contained  in Equation  2.81: 
this recursion relation  is cquiv‹ilcnt  to  the Schitidingcr  equation,  so  it's .qr›r  to 
include  bc›tli  the  iisyinptotic  forms  we found  in  Equation  2.73.
-* it  i.s pos.sihle  to set this up oil  a coiliputcr. and di.scovei  the allny cJ cner•ies 
“experimcntally.” You night  call it  the  wag the dog methud:  When  the  tail ways. yc›u know'  
ynu”ve  jusl pussed oycr an allowed  value. Sec Pi oblcms  2.54—2.56.

Section  2.3:  Tbe IJartnonic  Oscillator



1.5

05

-2
-0.5

—1.5

(a)



1.5

0.5

-0.5

—1.5

(b)

FIGURE 2.6:    Solutions   to   the   Schriidinger   equation   for   (a)   £   =    0.49 fts,   
and
(b) E  =  0.51 Its.


For  the  allowed  values  of  K,   the recursion  forlTlula  reads

—2(ii  —  /)
'+°      (j + 1)(j1   2)   ‘’


and  j     0 in Equation  2.84 yields «z =  0):


[2.84]





and  hence


f‹o(t) = «oe° ‘"'

Time-lndebendetit  Scl›r‘odltieer Equation

(which,  apart  from  the  normalization, reproduces  Equation  2.59).  For  it       1 we


and  hence


(confirming  Equation  2.62).  For  ii  =   2,  y       0  yields  •2 =   —2•o. and  y       2 
gives
rig      0.  so


and


means.)
In general, /i„(}) will be a polynomial  of degree r  in },  involving even powers only,  if  n  is 
 an  even  integ•er,  and  odd  powers  only,  if  ii  is  an  odd  integer.  Apart frrim  fhe  
riverall   factor  frin  n•  oi 1      ••    ••e  the  «n-called  Hermife  iinlvnnminls
f„({).*9  The  first  few  of  them  are  listed  in  Table 2.1.  By  tradition,  the  arbitrary
multiplicative  factor  is  chosen  so  that  the  coefficient  of  the  highest  power  of  }



[2.85]



TABLE 2.1:    The first few Hermite polynomials,  N„ (}).

H0'1,
H,  = 4f;2 — 2.
H3 = 8f;" — l2§,
Hi — l6J‘ — 48a' +  12,
H3 = 32¿5 — 160a’ +  l20f;.


-   Note  that  there  is a completely  different  set  or coefficients  rig  for each  value  of 
o.
-  The  Hcrmitc  polynomials  have  been  studied  cxtcnsivcly  in  the  mathematical   literature, 
 and there  are  many  tools  and  tricks  l'or  workings  with  them.  A  l'ew  of  these  are  
explored  ill  Problem  2.17.
”01shall  not  wurk  out  the  normalization  constant  hcrc:  if you  arc  intcrcsted  in knowing  
flow  it is done,  sec  tor example  Leonard  Scsifr.  Q       «      Meclinii ices,  3rd ed.,  
McGraw-Hill,  New  York  (1968). Section  13.

Section 2.J.  Tbe  flartiionic  Oscillator          37

In  Figure  2.7(a)  I   have  plotted   J„(.i)  for  the  first   few  ii ’s.  The  quantum 
oscillator  is  strikingly   different   from  its  classical  counterpart—not  only  are  the 
energies  quantized,  but  the  position  distributions  have  some  bizarre  features.  For 
instance,  the probability  of finding  the particle outside  the classically  allowed range (that  
is.  with  x  greater  than  the  classical  amplitude  f'or  the  energy  in  question)  is

particle at the center is zero. Only  at large n do we bep•in  to see some resemblance to  the  
classical  case.  In  Figure  2.7(b)  I  have  superimposed  the  classical  position

the  two  would  fit  Dretty  well  (however,  in  the classical  case  we are  talkinp• about the 
distribution  of  positions  over  riiiir  for one  oscillator,  whereas  in  the quantum case we 
are  talking  about  the distribution  over an ensemble  of identically  prepared systems)."¹

Problem 2.15  In the g•round state of the harmonic oscillator, what is the probability (correct  to 
 three  significant  digits)  of  finding   the  particle  outside  the  classically allowed  
region?  Hint.  Classically,  the  enerp•y  of  an oscillator  is  E       (1/2)kri    = 
(1/2)nim'o-,  where  u  is  the  amplitude.  So  the “classically  allowed  reg•ion”  for an 
oscillator  of energy  E  extends  from  —    2£/i         to +     2E   ni   -.  Look  in a math 
table  under  “Normal  Distribution”  or “Error  Function”  for  the  numerical  value  of the  
inte

Problem 2.16  Use  the  recursion  formula  (Equation  2.84)  to  work  out  ^5(t) and Hi(    ).  
Invoke  the  convention  that  the  coefficient  of  the  highest  power  of  }  is  2" to  iix  
the  overall  constant.

»Problem 2.17  In this problem we explore some of the more useful theorems (stated

(a)   The Rodrigues  formula  says  that

[2.86j

Use  it  to derive  ff3 and  Hi.
(b)  The following  recursion  relation  givcs you  If. +   in terms of the two prcccd- Hermite     
    nomials:



Use it, together  with  your answer  in (a), to ubtain  ^5  and  Hb.
[2.87)

- ' Thc  parallel  is perhaps  more direct  if  you  interpret  the  classical  distribution  as an 
ensemble  of oscillators  ‹tll  with  the  same  energy,  but  with  random  starring  times.



58         C/ apter 2    Time- Indepetideitt  Scl r’oditiger Eqooiioti




























!V1oo(*)12   0.24        t

0.20         I


0.16


0.12


0.06  —


0.04  —
all

(a)








i


iuiiiiiiiiii/iii‹i:iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiriiiiiiiiiii‹i/iii‹iini7‹iliiiililli


FIGURE 2.7:    (a)  The  first   four  stationary   states  of   the  harmonic   oscillator.  This 
material  is  used  by  permission  of  John  Wiley   &   Sons,  Inc.;  Stephen  Gasiorowicz, 
Qun›ituni  I?'l  ysics,  John  Wiley  &   Sons,  Inc.,  1974.  (b)  Graph  Of  | t1001   .  with  
the
classical  distribution  (dashed  curve) superimposed.

Section 2.4:  The hree  I?urticle          S 9

{c)   IN  you  differentiate  an  with-order  polynomial,  you  get  a  polynomial  of  order (ii  
—  l).   For the Hermite  polynomials,  in fact,

[2.88)

Check  this,  by differentiating  H5 and  Vb.
(d)   H„(}) is the with ‹-derivative, at z =  0, of the generating function exp(—‹* -1-
:  or,  to  put  it  anot  er  way,  it  is  I  e  coe   cient  o        n !  in  t       ay
series expansion  for  this function:


2.89

Use this to rederive    to, H  , and  H›_.


2.4 THFFRFF PARTICLE                                                                                
                      

( V(.v) =  0 everywhere).  Classically  this would just mean  motion  at constant  veloc- ity,  but 
 in  quantum  mechanics  the  problem  is  surprisinp•ly  subtle  and  tricky.  The 
time-independent  Schriidinger  equation  reads




or
  '          —k'- f.      where  k        2tE 
[2.90]


[2.91)

So  far,  it’s  the  same  as  inside  the  infinite  square  well  (Equation  2.2 l),  where  the 
potential  ls  also  zero:  this  time,  however,  I  prefer  to  write  the  general  solution  in 
exponential  form (instead  of sines and cosines),  for reasons  that  will  appear  in due course:
(x) =   Ae'”’“  +   Be  '”“‘.                                             [2.92]
Unlike  the  Infinite  square  well,  there  are  no  boundary   conditions   tu  restrict   the 
possible  values  of  k  (and  hence  of  E);  the  free  particle  can  carry  ‹rim›  (positive) 
energy.  Tacking  on  the  standard  time dependence,  exp(—i El    ñ),

[2.93
Now,  oiij'  function  of .r  and  r  that  depends  on  these  variables  in  the  special 
combination  (x I   ri)   (for  some  constant  r)  represents  a  wave  of  fixed  profile, 
travelinp•  in  the  y.i-direction,  at  speed   u.  A  fixed  point  on  the  waveform  (for


60          Chapter 2    Time-Independent Sch r‘oditiget  Equatioti

example, a maximum or a minimum) corresponds  to a fixed value of the argument, and  hence  to .i  
and  r  such  that
.r      ur =  constant.     or    x      put  -l- constant.

Since  every  point  on  the  waveform   is  moving   along  with  the  same  velocity,  its 
slu:lpe  doesn't  change  as  it  propagates.  Thus  the  first  term  in Equation  2.93 repre- sen 
s     wa  e   ra  eling   o   he            and   he   econd rep esen  s a wa  e (of     e   a   e

k,  we might  as  well  write

[2.941
and  let k  run negative  to cover the case  of  waves  traveling  to the  left:

k > 0         travelin    to the  ri  ht I  < 0         traveling  to the left.

Evidently  the “stationary  states”  of  the  free  particle  are  propagating  waves;  their 
wavelength is X =   2s/|£|, and, according to the de Broglie formula (Equation  1.39),

2.96



2.97

n t  e ot  er   an       e c              spee            ree particle  wit   energy      is given




uc{dssical '       \
2€  '       2/’quantum•                                               [2.981



is  an even  more  serlous  problem  we  need  to confront  first:  This  waive  function  i.s riot 
rim mali*able. For

[2.991

In  the  case  of  the  free  particle,  then,  the  separable  solutions  do  not  represent 
physically  realizable  states.  A  free  particle  cannot  exist  in  a  stationary  state;  or, 
to  put  it  another  way,  there  i.s  no  si,icli  thing  as  ci .[i ee  par tie'le  mirth  u  
definite eneig;•.

Secl,ion 2.4:  The £ree  P‹iriic/e         61

But  that  doesn‘t  mean  the  separable  solutions  are  of  no  use  to  us,  for  they play  a  
mathematical   role  that  is  entirely  independent   of  their  plij’sie’al   interpre- tation.  
The  general  solution  to  the  time-dependent  Schrodinger  equation  is  still  a linear  
combination  of  separable  solutions  (only  this  time  it's  an  iiiregm/  over  the continuous  
variable  k, instead  of  a  sum  over  the  discrete  index  n):






(The  quantity  1/    2    is  factored  ont  for  convenience;  what  plays  the  role  of  the 
coefficient   r„  in  Equation  2.17  is  the  coiiibination   (I /          )Q (k) i:Ik.)  Now  
this wave functlon  run  be nomialized  (for appropriate  ‹f(k)).  But  it  necessarily  carries

packet.  '
In  the generic  quantum  problem,  we are  given  W(.x, 0), and  we are asked  to Jx£/  '(.i. r).  
For  a  free  particle  the  solution  takes  the  form  of  Equation  2.100; the  only  question  
is  how  to  detennine     ‹k)  so  as  to  match  the  initial  wave function:
1                 {k)e'““’“  flk.                                [2.101]

This is a classic problem in Fourier analysis; the answer is provided  by Plancherel's theorem (see 
Problem  2.20):




+‘F(k)e'"’“ ak  m»   r ‹k›=                        e  '‘k’“  d.v.
[2.1021



F(k) is called the Fourier transform of    (.  );  /’(.i)  is the inverse Fourier trans- form  of  
F(k)  (the  only  difference  is  in  the  sign  of  the  exponent).  There  is,  of course,  some  
restriction  on  the allowable  functions:  the integrals  have  to e.list.-
Fnr    mrr   pnrpnur•‹  this  in  gi iorontr•r•d  hy   thr•  phy  nice I  rr•qi ii rr•rnr•nt  th of 
 W ( r   fl)  i t<el f


"SiflUStJidil$  Wilvcs  extend  out  to  infinity.  and  they  arc  not  normalizable.  But  
superpnsiri‹›ns  of such  waves  lcad  to  interference.  which  allows  ior  localization  and  
normalizability.
””The  necessary   and  suf'l1cient   condition   on   |”(.  )  is  that  /         I./“f   ) I-/   
›        ./M/c.  (In   that
case  /”     16(*) I-J*  is  alro  tillite.  and  in  tact  the  two  integrate  ai'c  equal.)  Sec 
 Arlñcn  (lot›tnt›tc  24). Section  1.5.5.


62          C/ agtet’ 2    Time-Independent Scbt‘odinger  Equation

be normalized. So the solution to the generic quantum problem, for the free particle, is Equation  
2.100, with


[2.103]






is released  at  time r  =  0:


0.     otherwise,






Next  we calculate ‹:f(k). using Equation  2.103:

e   '”’ " d.v

1         e•'""  — e  '”“            I    sin(k«)
k                    2i                              k

Finally, we p1up•  this  back  into Equation  2.100:

[2.104]

n oi  una e y       s  integra   cannot    e   o ve    in   e  us  o   e e   en    y     n    ons, 
though  it can of  course  be evaluated  numerically  (Figure 2.8). (There  are,  ui fact, precious 
few cases in  which  the integral for  T(.r. /)  (Equation  2.100) exon  be cal- culated  
explicitly;  see Problem  2.22 for a particularly  beautiful  example.)
It is illuminating  to explore  the limiting  cases.  If o  is very small,  the starting wave 
function  is a  nicely  localized  spike  (Figure  2.9(a)).  In  this  case  we can  use the small 
angle approximation  to write sin(ko)     ka, and  hence

Section  2.4:  The  free Particle          63




0.4

0.3






—4         —2           0          2           4

FIGURE 2.8:    Graph  of  |T(z, t)12  (Equation 2.104)  at  t  =   0  (the  rectangle)  and  at I  
=   ›nn2/ft (the curve).

’I‘(x,  0)
















FIGURE 2.9:    Example 2.6, for small n. (a) Graph of  ¥(z, 0). (b) Graph of Q(fi).

it's .9or,  since  the  k’s  cancelled  out  (Figure 2.9(b)).  This  is  an  example  of  the 
uncertainty  principle:  If  the spread  in  position  is small,  the spread  in momentum

ri)  the spread  in  position  is broad  (Figure  2.10(a))  and

k

Now, sin z/z  has its maximum  at z =  0, and  drops  to zero at z =      a   (which, in this 
context,  means k          u  o). So for lar  e o,          is a sh          lke about k     0 
(Figure 2.10(b)).  This  tlme  it's  got  a  well-defined  momentum  but  an  ill-defined position.

’t‘fx. 0\
§(k)











k

(a)                                                                           (b)



I return  now  to  the paradox  noted  earlier:  the fact  that  the separable  solution
+¿ t.i. r;  in  equation z.uo  Travers  at  tne    wrong    speed  ior  tne  particle  it  osten-
clFil \/    r/>nrr>c+>nfc     V frtr 1.1 \/     cn/>slr1n a      Oh+>   nrmFil/>rri    F•x/snmrs I 
+>/d    th+>n    w+>   rl I cr   mx/i>r+>rl
that  T¿  is  not  a  physically  realizable  state.  Nevertheless,  it  is  of  interest  to  dis- 
cover how infomiation about velocity is contained in the lree particle wave function

sinusoidal functions  whose amplitude is modulated  bY Q (Figure 2.11); it consists of “ripples” 
contained  within an “envelope.”  What corresponds  to the particle velocity is  nor  inc  spccu  
ui  iiic  inuiviuu‹ii  ripples  (inc  so-c‹iiicu  purse  veiucity j.  nut  runner the  sneed  of  
the  envelone  (the  grouD  velocitv)—which.  denendine  on  the  nature of  the  waves,  can be 
greater  than,  less than, or equal  to,  the  velocity  of  the ripples tnat  go  to maxe  it  up. 
 ror waves on  a string,  tne  group  velocity  is tne  same  as  tne

noticed  when  you  toss a rock into a pond (if  you concentrate  on  a particular  ripple, you  
will  see  it  build  up  from  the rear,  move  forward  through  the  group,  and  fade

I need to show is that for the wave function of a free particle in quantum mechanics


aiiiix   V





lope”  travels  at  the group  velocity;  the “rip- ples” travel at the phase velocity.

Section 2.4:  The  free  Particle         65

the  p•roup  velocity  is tn•iee  the phase  velocity—just  rip•ht  to represent  the  classical
particle speed.
The  problem,  then,  is  to determine  the  group  velocity  of  a  wave packet  with the  general 
 form


(In  our  case  in  =   (hk-/2in),  but  what  I  have  to  say  now  applies  to  oiiJ   kind of  
wave  packet,  regardless  of  its  dispersion  relation—the  formula  for  in  as  a

value ko. (There is nothing ille,qal  about a broad spread in k, but such wave packets chanp•e  
shape  rapidly—slnce  different  components  travel  at different  speeds—so the  whole  notion  of 
 a  “group,”  with  a  well-defined  velocity,  loses  its  meaning.) Since  the  inteerand  is  
negligible  except  in  the  vicinity  of  Iq,  we  may  as  well Taylor-expand  the function in(k) 
about that point, and keep only the leading  terms:
u›(k)     no + u›  (k  — ko)
where mp is  the derivative of  ni with respect  to k, at the point *0-
Changing  variables  from  k  to  s      k  — ko (to  center  the  integral  at  ko). we
have


At  r  =  0,

‹f (kg -J— s)e'(   +"'’" ‹1s,




v(<.›) =        e"  •"'+"'•i›"
—p  #(ko + s)e'"•+•“"-'  '•i" ds.
Except  for  the  shift  from  x  to  (x  — m0r),  the  integral  is  the  same  as  the  one  in
'1'(x, 0). Thus
T(x, r) =  e  """    "°‹   T(.r  — u›Ot. 0).                       [2.105]
Apart  front  the  phase  factor  in  front  (which  won't  affect  | T |'   in  any  event)  the


[2.106]
(evaluated  at k       o)  This is to be contrasted  with  the ordinary  phase velocity
[2.107)

66         Chapter 2    Titre-Indepeisdent Scbr‘odinger  Equation

In our case, n› =  (ñ k'-/2m), so in/ k  —— tñ kl2iti), whereas du›/dk      tñ k l in), which is  
twice  as  great.  ThlS  Confirms  that  lt  is  the  group  velocity  of  the  wave  packet, not  
the  phase  velocity  of  the  stationary  states,  that  matches  the  classical,  particle 
velocity:
classical '         =°ioul› '     2     Phase'                                            [2.108]

Problem 2.18  Show that   Ae' ” + B e  ' "’   and   C cos k.v +  D sin kx] are equivalent

terms of  A  and  B,   and  vice  versa.  CorinieHr:  In quantum  mechanics,  when  V  =  0, the  
exponentials  repre.sent  ti aveliitg  waves,  and  are  most  convenient  in discussing the  free  
particle,  whereas  sines  and  cosines  correspond  tO  stcm*!!•g  waves,  which arise naturally  
in  the case  of  the  infinite  square  well.

l•robiem  2.lV  find  tfie  probability  current,  I   tProblem  i.l4)  for  tfie tree particle 
wave  function  Equation  2.94. Which  direction  does  the  probability  current  flow?

+Problem 2.20  This problem  is deslgned  to g•uide  you  through  a “proof”  of  Plan- cherel's 
theorem,  by starting  with  the theory  of  ordinary 1-ourier  series on a Quite
in  fr•rvn 1,  nnrl  n11 nwin@   thnF  i ntr•r's   1   In    r•x psnrJ   In  infi nify


can be expanded  as a Fourier  series:





(x) —   Z c„eⁱ    ’'  .
What  is c„, in  terms of  r„  and  ñ„?
(b)  Show  (by  appropriate  modification  of  Fourier's  trick)  that



(c)   Eliminate  n  and  c,   in  favor  of  the  new  variables  k       (us/r)  and  F(k)  ——
2      seq.  Show  that  (a)  and  (b) now  become



where  Ok  is the increment  in k  froi:n one ii  to the  next.

Section 2.4:  The £ree Particle         67

(d)   Take  the  limit  o  —+  on  to  obtain  Plancherel's   theorems.  Coinitieiit:   In  view of 
 their  quite  different  origins,  it  is  surprising•  (and  dellghtful)  that  the  two 
formulas—one  for  F(k)  in  terms  of   {(.  ),  the  other  for   f   .i)  in  terms  of 
F(k)—have  such  a  similar  structure  in  the  limit  o  —+  m.

l'roblem 2.21   A  free particle  has  the initial  wave  tunction
T(.r. 0) =   Act   "‘“  ,
where  A  and  o  are positive real  constants.
orma ize


(c)   Construct  T(a. r), in  the form of  an integral.
(d)   Discuss  the limiting  cases (r  very  larp•e,  and  r  very  small).

Problem 2.22  The  gaussian  wave  packet.  A  free  particle  has  the  initial  wave function
T(.i. 0) =   Ae  "’,
where  A  and  o  are  constants  (o  is real  and  positive).
(a)   Normalize  T (.r. 0).
(b)   Find  T(.i. /).  Hint:  Integrals  of  the  form



can         an                            in•p    e square  :                                       
   ,  an




(c)   Find  | T(.i, r) |'.   Express  your answer  in  terms of  the quantity



Sketch  |T |-  (as a function  of .i) at  i  =  0, and  again  for some  very 1arp•e  i. 
Qualitatively, what  happens  to | T |-,  as time goes on?
(d)   Find  (.› ),  (/›),  (. -),   (g'),    , ,  and  o„.  Pm tinl  ‹:msv•ei.   (/›2)       nñ-,  
but  it
may  take some  algebra  to reduce  it  to this .siiiiple form.
(e)   Does  the  uncertainty  principle  hold'?  At  what  time  r  does  the  system  come closest 
 to  the  uncertainty  limit?


68         Chapter 2    Time-Independent Scl r‘odtnger  E mation

2.5  THE DELTA-FUNCTION POTENTIAL
2.5.1  Bound States  and Scattering States
We have encountered  two very different kinds of solutions to the time-independent Schrodinger  
equation: For the infinite square well and  the harmonic  oscillator they


o     o      lizahle, and  labeled  by  a  coiitiiiuoti.s v6riaear
he fo
represent
physically realizable states in their own i‘ight, the latter do not; but in both cases the general 
solution to the time-dependent Schrfidinger equatlOn is a linear combination
of       1On:my states—for  the  fir.st  type  this  combinati       akes  the form  of  a  stint
whereas  for  the  second  it  is an  iiitegrcil  (o        ).  What  is  the  physical 
significance  of  this distinction?


rise to two rather diffei'ent  kinds of  motion. If  V total energy         on  either side  
(Fip•ure  2.12(a)), potential  wellit  rocks  back and  forth  between
rises higher than  the particle's then  the particle  is “stuck”  in  the the turning points,  but  
lt cannot
escape  (unless,  of  course,  you  provide  it  with  a  source  of  extra  energy,  such  as a  
motor,  but  we're  not  t•1D'n•qabout  that).  We call  this  a  bound  state. If, on  the other 
hand,  E  exceeds  V        on one side (or both),  then  the particle  comes  in from “infinity,”  
slows door speeds up under the influence of  the potential, and returns to infinity  (Figure  2     
 b)). (It can't  get trapped  in the potential  unless there is some iTlechanisin,  such as 
friction,  to di.isiyate  energy,  but  again,  we're not  talking  about

instance,  the  harmonic  oscillator);  some  allow  only  scattering•  states  (a  potential hill  
with  no  dips  in  it,  for  example);  some  permit  both  kinds,  depending  on  the enerp•y  of 
 the particle.
The two kinds of solutions to the Schrfidinger equation correspond  precisely  to bound and 
scatterinp• states. The distinction is even cleaner in the quantum domain, because  the  phenomenon 
 of  tunneling  (which  we'll  come  to  shortly)  allows  the particle  to “leak”  through  any  
lin       otential  barrier, so the only  thing  that matters is the potential  at infinity  
(Figured. 2(c)):


E  <    V(—on)     and  V(-1-c›o)]  W     bound  state,
E  >    V   —on)     or     V (-{-on)]            scattering  state.
(2.109]

In  “real  life”  most  potentials  p•o  to  z.em  at  infiiuty,  in  which  case  the  criterion



E  <  0          bound  state,
E  >  0          scattering  state.
[2.110a

Because the infinite square well and harmonic oscillator potentials go to infinity  as
x  —+  I  c›o, they adiiiit bound states only; because the free particle potential  is zero

Section  2.5:  The Defter-furiCfiori Pofeiifi‹i/           hY










Classical turning points (a)












Classical turning point











classical turning points



(c)

FIGURE 2.12:    (a) A  bound state. (b) Scattering states. (c) A  classical bound state, but a 
quantum  scattering  state.

everywhere,  it  only  allows  scattering  states."   In  this  section  (and  the  followinp• one) 
 we shall  explore  potentials  that g•ive rise  to both  kinds of  states.

-"II‘ you  are  irritatinply  observ‹tnt.  you  may  have  noticed  that  the  general  theorem  
requiring ñ   >   Pn,;n  (Problem 2.2)  does  not  really   apply  to  scattering   states.  since  
they  are  not  normalizable anyway.  11’  this  bothers  you.  try  solving  the SclH-iidinger  
equation  with  E      0.  l'or the  free  particle.  and














FIGURE 2.13:    The Dirac  delta  function quation

2.5.2  The Delta-Function Well


orip•in,  whose eren  is  I  (Fip•ure  2.13):


if .v  =   0



with



[2.111]

Technically.  it isn’t a function at all, since it is not finite at .r  =  0 (mathematicians call  
it a generalized  function,  or distribution)."   Nevertheless,  it  is an extremely useful 
construct in theoretical  physics. (For example, in electrodynainics the charge eiisi               
                                          ion.

it's  the same as mu1tiplying•  by  f(a),


because  the product  is  Rei o anyway  except at  the point  r.  In  particular,

[2.113)

That's  the most  ilTlpoitant  property  of  the delta funCtlon:  Under  the  lntep•ral  slgn it 
serves  to “pick out”  the  value of   f(.i)  at  the point  ri. (Of  course,  the  intep•ral  need

aha
no   po   ron              o
er   is     a      e    o   a n o    n egr     on   nc u  e
the  point  ri,  so o  — c  to o -l- c  would  do,  for  any  e  >  0.)
Let's  consider  a potential  of  the  forum

[2.114]

note that r›•‹•ii /iM‹•‹ii' ‹-r›/ii/›i/ir//ir›//.r  t›l' thc.sc .sclritioMs cann‹›t  bc 
nt›i°inalizeJ. Thc gnritivc enci'gy st›lutinMs by  theme cl\’c.x  cell.stitutc  a  coinplctc  sct.
“*Tl1c ctclta  Iunctit›M  ct\n  bc lhnuelit  cf as tile  /i/riir  oI” :i .«’‹p«mce  t›f  
£uilctions. such  as i'cctanzlcs (oi  triangles)  of' c 'ei-inciea.sin*s hci  let  «nd  
ever-decreasing  wicltli.

Section 2.S:  The Deffo-finicfion Pofenffffl         71
where a  is some positive constant.³6 This is an artificial potential, to be sure (so was the 
infinite square well), but it's delightfully  simple  to work with, and illuminates the  basic  
theory  with  a  minimum  of  analytical  clutter.  The Schrodinger  equation for the 
delta-function well reads
¿p2   2l¿
[2.115]

it yields  both bound  states (E  < 0) and  scattering  states (£  > 0).
We’11 look  first at the bound  states. In the region .r  < 0,  V(. ) =  0, so
d-’             2itt
dx  2                  2


where

—2›nf

2.117

(£  is neg•ative,  by assumption,  so  K  is real  and  positive.)  The general  solution  to 
Equation  2.116 is
[2.118j



/(.    )      Be"“.     (x  <  0).                                    [2.119]

In  the  region  .   >  0,  V(.  )  is  again  zero,  and  the  general  solution  is  of  the  
form I   exp(—cx) +  G exp(c.  );  this  time  it's  the  second  term  that  blows  up  (as  .r  
—+


It  remains  only  to  stitch  these  two  functions  together,  using  the  appropriate boundary  
conditions  at     =  0.  I quoted  earlier  the  standard  boundary  conditions for  J:


1.  9              is always  continuous:
2.  d f cdx      is continuous  except  at  points  where  the  potential  is  infinite.



Be‘“.      (.   < 0).
Be**".    (.z  > 0):
[2.121]



[2.122]


"The delta  function  itself’ carries units o1’ 1//eo$r/t  (sce Etjuation  2.111 ). so a  has  the 
dimensions
‹•ii‹•i Sq5-  x   leii $ th.

72         Chapter  2    JJffie-$ffJepe ident  Scl râdinger £qoorion










FIGURE 2.14:     Bound  state   wave  function  for  the  delta-function  potential   (Equa-
tion 2.122).

f(x)  is  plotted  in  Figure 2.14.  The  second  boundary  condition  tells  us  nothing; this is 
(like the infinite square well)  the exceptional  case where  V  is infinite at the

up to this point  the delta function  has not come into the story  at all. Evidently  the delta  
function  must  determine  the discontinuity  in  the derivative  of  J,   at .r  =  0. I’11 show  
you  now  how  this  works,  and  as a  by-product  we'll  see  why  d f cdx  is ordinaril   
continuous.
The idea  is  to ititegi ate  the Schrodinger  equation,  from  —c  to  +c, and  then


/:²             d-  f
2iii            ‹1.x-’
+<
4.       E            (.  ) dx.            [2. t23]

integral  is zero,  in  the limit  c  —+  0, since it's  the area of  a  sliver  with  vanishing 
width  and  finite  height. Thus
2ni            +‹

Typically,  the limit on  the right is again zero, and  that's why d f/dx  is ordinarily 
continuous.  But  when  V(.v)  is  inquire  at  the  boundary,  this  argument  fails.  In ar 
icular. if V                                         .113 yields
2ina

d.
For the case at  hand  (Equation  2.122),
/(0).
h'-
[2.125]
d f/ñ   v      — B K F.  "",       for  (.   > 0).    so d f/dx+       —B K,


and  hence  A( 1 f/dx)     —2 Br.  And     (0) =  B. So Equation  2.125  says
[2.126]

Section 2.5:  The Della-Firiicfiun Puteniiof          73
and  the allowed  energ•y  (Equation  2.117)  is
E  ——  —                                                                        [2.127]
Finall  , we normalize
K
[2. t28]
bound  state:
[2.129]
h
What about scattei'iiig  states, with  E  > 0? For .v  < 0 the Schriidinger equation
=—k- i.





is real  and  positive. The general  solution  is



Similarly,  for .v  >  0,

The continuit           (z)  at .   =  0 re  uires  that
F  —F G  ——  A +  B.






2.131


[2.132]


[2. 133]


The derivatives  are
d f/d.       ik   Fe""’  — Ge°'”    .    for (.r  >  0).     SO  ff fi/d.v+|

=  ik(r —  G).
d f!d.        ik   Ae'””’  — 13c°'‘’!-’‘)  ,     for  (.i  <  0).     so d f  fd.v           ik(A — 
 B).

74         Cl upter 2    Time-Independent Scl›râdfnger  Equution

and  hence  k(d f/dx)      ik(F  — G   —  A +  B). Meanwhile,     (0)  =   (A +  B), so the second  
boundary  condition  (Equation  2.125)  says
ik(F  —  G   —  A +   B) =      2ii     (A +  B),                         [2.134]


or, more  compactly,

F  — G   —-  A(l +  2i)) —  B(I  — 2i   ).     where  B  ——

f:2k .           [2.1351
Having  imposed  both  boundary   conditions,   we  are  left  with  two  equations (Equations  
2.133  and  2.135)  in  four  unknowns  (A,   B,   F,   and  G)—Ave,  if  you count  k. 
Normalization  won't  help—this  isn't  a  normalizable  state.  Perhaps  we'd better  pause,   
then,  and  examine  the  physical  sip•nificance  of  these  various  con-

factor  exp(—i Er//i))  to  a  wave function  propaq•ating  to  the  rig/it,  and  exp(—f kx) leads 
to a wave propagating  to the  le/r. It follows  that  A (in Equation  2.131) is the amplitude of a 
wave coining  in from  the  left,  B  is the  amplitude  of a wave return-

rip•ht,  and G  is the amplitude of a wave coming  in front  the right (see Figure 2.15). In  a  
typical  scattering  experiment  particles  are  fired  in  from  one  direction—let's

will  be  zero:
G  —— 0.     (for  scattering  from  the  left):                          [2.136]
A is the amplitude of the incident  wave,  B  is the amplitude  of  the reflected  wave,
and  F   is  the  amplitude  of  the  transmitted  wave.  Solving  Equations  2.U3  and



B          _  ,g A,      F  —          .    A.
{2.137]

(If  you  want  to  study  scattering  from  the  right,  set  A —— 0;  then  G   is  the  incident 
amplitude,  F  is  the reflected  amplitude,  and  B  is the  transmitted  amplitude.)








FIGURE 2.15:   Scattering  from  a  delta  func-
tion well.

Section  2.5:  The DeIia-Fiiiic/i,oo Pofenfiof           75

Now,  the probability  of  finding the particle at a specified  location  is given  by T |*, so the 
re/arive³⁷ probability  that an incident  particle will  be reflected  back is

A|-
R  is  called  the  reflection  coefficient.  (If  you  have  a  6erini   of  particles,  it  tells 
you  the   fi ar’tfOi1  Of  the  incoming  number  that  will  bounce  back.) Meanwhile,  the 
probability  of  transmission  is given  by  the  transmission  coefficient

[2.139]

Of  course,  the surat  of  these probabilities  should  be 1 —and  it is :

[2.140]

Notice  that  R  and  T  are  functions  of  d,  and  hence  (Equations  2.130  and  2.135) of  E:
1                                        1                            [2.141]


The higher  thc energy,  thc grcatcr the probability  of  transmission  (which  certainly seems  
reasonable).
This  is all  very  tidy,  but  there  is a sticky  matter  of  principle  that  we cannot

don't actually  represent  possible particle states. But we know  what  the resolution  to this 
problem  is:  We  must  form  normalizable  linear  combinations  of  the  stationary states,  just 
 as  we  did  for  the  free  particle—true  physical  particles  are  represented by  the 
resulting  wave  packets.  Though  straightforward  in  principle,  this  is a messy business  in  
practice,  and  at  this  point  it  is  best  to  turn  the  problem  over  to  a computer." 
Meanwhile,  since it is impossible  to create a normalizable  free-particle

as  the  aypro.xiinnte   reflection  and  transmission  probabilities  for  particles  in  the
i!icinit)!  of  E.
Incidentally,  it  might  strike  you  as  peculiar  that  we  were  able  to  analyze  a 
n,uintessentially time-dependent problem  fparticle comes in, scatters off a potential,

"   This  is  not  a  normalizable   wave  l'unction.  so  the  afisnfiife   probability  of  
findilm  the  particle at  a  par iicular  location  is  not  well  dehned:  nevertheless.  the  
ieiir›  of  pl-obabilities  for  the  incident  and reflected  waves  is  me‹iningful,  More  on  
this  in  the  next  paragraph.
3'Numerical  studies  ol’ svuvc  packets  scattering  ot'f  wells  and  barriers  reveal  
extrat›rdinarily  rich su-ucture.  The  classic  analysis  is  A.  Goldberg,  H.  M.  Schey.  and  
J.  L.   Schwartz,  Atn.  J.  Plt j s.  35.  177 (1967):  more  recent  work  can  be  found  on  
the  Web,

Time-Independent Schrodntfer £qf.iotio›r








FIGURE 2.16:    The delta-function barrier.
and  flies  off  to  infinity)  using•  stations ¿!  states.  After  all,       (in  Equations 
2.131 and  2.132)  is  simply  a complex,  time-independent,  sinusoidal  function,  extending 
(with   constant   amplitude)   to  infinity   in  both   directions.   And   yet,   by   imposing 
appropriate  boundary  conditions  on  this  function  we  were  able  to determine  the 
probability  that  a particle (represented  by  a localiz.ed  wave packet)  would  bounce

suppose, the fact that by takinp• linear combinations  of states spread over all space, and with 
essentially  trivial  time dependence,  we can consti u,cl  wave functions that are concentrated  
about a (moving•)  point, with quite elaborate  behavior in time (see

As long as we’ve got the relevant  equations  on the table, let's look  briefly at the case of  a 
delta-function  furrier   (Fip•ure 2.16).  Formally,  all  we have  to do is change  the sign  of  
a.  This kills  the  bound  state,  of  course  (Problem  2.2). On  the other hand, the reflection  
and  transmission  coefficients,  which depend only on n-, are unchanged. Stranp•e to say, the 
particle is just as likely to pass through the barrier

infinitely hig•h barrier, regardless of its energy. In fact, classical scattering problems are  
pretty  drill:  If  E  >  V„p,  then  T        I  and  R       0—the  particle  certainly makes  it 
 over;  if  E  <    p„   then  T       0  and  R  ——  1—it  rides  up  the  hill  until it  runs 
out  of  steam,  and  then  returns  the same  way  it came.  Quantum  scattering problems  are  
much  richer:  The  particle  has  some  nonzero  probability  of  passing through  the potential  
even if  ñ  <  Pq„  . We call  this phenomenon  tunneling;  it is the  mechanism  that  makes  
possible  much  of  modern  electronics—not  to mention spectacular   advances  in  microscopy.  
Conversely,  even  if  E         max  there  is  a
possibility  that  the  particle  will  bounce  back—though  I  wouldn't  advise  driving
off  a cliff  in  the hope that quantum  mechanics  will save you  (see Problem  2.35).

+Problem 2.23  Evaluate  the following  integrals:
(a)   J“     (.i" — 3.v' -J- 2.r  —  I)6(x +  2) dx.


(c)   /“t’ exp(|.  | -I- 3)6(.i  — 2) six.





Problem 2.24  Delta functions live under integi'al signs, and two expressions (D; (a ) and  D› ix)) 
involving  delta functions are said  to be equal  if



for every  (ordinary)  function  /(.r).

2.142

where c is a real constant. (Be sure to check the case where  r is nep•ative.) et           e t  e 
step   unc ion:
if .r  > 0.                                2.143
(In  the  rare  case  where  it  actually  matters,  we  define  8(0)  to  be  1/2.)  Show
+Problem 2.25  Check   the   uncertainty    principle   for   the   wave   function    in

nag
Eq  at on 2 129     i        a cu a
s      ky    eca  se    e   eriva    e o       ha
a  step  discontinuity  at .x  =   0. Use  the  result  in  Problem 2.24(b).  Par tial  answer.


+Problem 2.26  What is the Fourier transform of 8(x)? Using Plancherel's theorem,

2s                                                            [2.144]
Comment:  This formula  gives any  respectable  mathematician  apoplexy.  Althoup•h

thing  else)  when  x       0,  since  the  intep•rand  oscillates  forever.  There  are  ways to  
patch  it  up  (for  instance,  you  can  integ•rate  from  —L  to  -l-L,  and  interpret q  a  on  
           o   ne        e    v  rage  vaue  o      e    me   inegra,  as      —›  on. The source 
of  the problem  is that  the delta function  doesn't  meet  the requirement (square-integrability) 
for  Plancherel's  theorem  (see  footnote 33). In  spite  of  this,
Eq  a ion 21      can  be extre   ely  use u       h      ed  w     c   e


v‹.›= —•N(. + ••› + i(«—•›]
w  ere     an         e pos  we   onstan s

(a)   Sketch  this  potential.




+Problem 2.28  Find  the transmission  coefficient  for the potential  in Problem  2.27.



2.6  THE FINITE SQUARE WELL

As a  last  example,  consider  the  )itife  square  well  potential

[    — Y».      fnr   — o   <    r   <   ff.
“   '         0.         for |.r |  > o,
where  Vo is a  (positive)  constant  (Fip•ure  2.17).  Like  the  delta-function well,  this 
potential admits both bound states (with  E  < 0) and scattering states (with  E  > 0). We'll  look 
first  at  the bound  states.
In the region  x  <  —o  the potential  is zero, so the Schrodinger  equation  reads

E f.       or


wnere
2    E                                           [2.146]
h

is real and  positive. The general solution  is    (x) =  A exp(—cx) +  B exp(Kx), but the  first  
tern  blows  up  (as .v  —›            so  the  physically  admissible  solution  (as before—see  
Equation  2.119)  is

(.i) =  Be‘”,    for x  <  —o.                              [2.147]








FIGURE 2.17:    The  finite  square   well
(Equation  2.145).

Section 2. 6.-  The Finite Sqii me  kVell         7f

In the rep•ion  —o  < .v  < o,  Y(.r)  —  — vo. and  the Schrodinp•er  equation  reads
It'-  d'-f
2in  dx*
where


Although   E  is  negative,  for  bound  states,  it  must  be  p•reater  than  — Y#,  by  the old  
theorem  E      Spin (Problem  2.2);  so 1  is also  real  and  positive. "1’he  general
SGiii tiGFi  iS39

Slll

where  C  and  D  are arbitrary  constants.  Finally,  in  the  region .r  >  ri  the potential

second  term  blows up (as .r  —›  no), so we are left  with
gz(.r)  =   Fe   K”.’    for .r  >  n.                                [2.150)

The  next step is to impose  boundary  conditions:      and d f/d.v  continuous at
—n  and  -l-‹i.  But  we can  save a little  time  by  notinp•  that  this  potential  is an even 
function,  so we can assume with  no loss of  generallty  that  the solutions  are either

the boundary  conditions on one side (say, at  +ri); the oilier side is then automatic, since     
(—.i)  =         (.i).  I'll  work  out  the even  solutions;  you  p•et  to do  the odd ones in 
Problem 2.29. The cosine  is even (and the sine is odd), so I'm looking for




D cos(l.v).    for 0 < .v  < a.

The  continuity  of     (.i),  at  .r  =   ri,  says
Fe°’‘“        D cos(fa).
and  the  continuity  of  d f/d.v,  says
—x re    ”'   ——  —/D s‘in(Io).


K  —— l tan(la).

[2.151]



[2.152]


[2.153)


[2.154]


"You  can.  if  you  like.  write  thc  eclJcral  solution  in  cxpolJclltial  foinJ  (C”‹  *”  +   
D'e   '”"').  TlJi.s leads  to  the same  linal  rcsult. hut .sincc  the  potential  is symmeti ie  
we  kno\v  the sulutiuns   vill  be eithcr even  oi° odd. ‹ind  tlJc  sins/corine  notali‹›n  
alloy's  us  tc cxploit  this ctircctl¿.

80         Chnptet  2



tan z









n/2                                                                                           5n/2

FIGURE 2.18:    Graphical  solution  to Equation 2.156,  for zo =        even states).
This  is a formula  for  the  allowed  energies,  since  c  and  I  are  both  functions


[2.155]

Accordinp• to Equations  2.14fi and 2.148, (K'-+ l')   =  2in <o/   2, SO K cl         z¿ — ?,  ,

[2.15G]
This  is  a  transcendental  equation  for  z  (and   hence  for  E)  as  a  function  of  zo 
(which  is a measure of  the  “size” of the  well).  It  can  be solved  numerically,  using a  
cofNputer,  or  graphically,  by  p1otting•  tan *  and      (*  /  )        1  on  the  saiaie  
grid,
and  lririkin r  frir  pnints  ref  intersection  Isee Fipure  2.1 h).  Twri  limiting=  cases  are 
 of
special  imerest:
1.  Wide,  deep  well.  If  z9  is  very  large,  the  intersections  occur just  slig•htly
below    „  =   iiu/2,  with  ii  odd;  it  follows  that

[2. 157]

But  E +  >o  ›s  the  energy  cihoi!e  the  hottoiti  of  the  ii!ell,  and  on  the  right  side 
we  have  precisely  the  infinite  square  well  eiierp•ies,  for  a  well  of  width  2s  (see 
Equation  2.27)—or  rather,  licil[  of  them,  since  this  ii  is odd. (The other ones,  of 
course, come front the odd  wave functions, as you'll discover in Problems  2.29.) So the finite  
square  well  p•oes over  to the infinite square  well, as Vz  —+  m;    however, for any Juice  
Vt)  there are only  a finite  number of  bound  states.
ow, narrow  we                 ecreases,  t  ere are   ewer an     ewer

remains. It is interestinp•  to note, however, that there is always cite  bound state, no matter  
heir  “weak”  the  well  becomes.

Section 2.6:  The Nitrite Square Well         81
You're   welcome   to   normalize         (Equation  2.151),   if   you're   interested (Problem 
2.30),  but  I'm  going  to  move  on  now  to  the  scattering  states (E  >  0). To  the left,  
where  V(x) = 0, we  have

(a ) =    Ae      +   Be
[2.158]
where (as usual)
Inside  the well,  where  P(.r) =  — Vo.
J(x) = C sin(lx)1    D cos(lx),     for  (—o  < x  < o).            [2.160]


where,  as before,


To the right, assuming  there is no incoming  wave in this region,  we have

fi (x)       Fe'“ "‘ .


[2.161]



[2.162]

Here  A is the incident  amplitude,  B is the reflected  amplitude,  and  F  is the trans- mitted  
amplitude.’0
There  are four  boundary  conditions:  Continuity  of     (x)  at  —o  says



continuity  of d fi/dx  at  —o  gives




con inui
Act   '"“  —  B e'"“            C  cos        +  D  sin

o  yie

C sin(/ri) +  D cos(Ifi)  =  F‹•'”‘ .



/[C cos(/o)  —  D  sin(fa)] ——  ik Fe'"" .
2.1fi4



[2.165]



[2.166]


"We     could   look  for  even  and  odd  functions.  as  we  did  in  thc  citsc  of   bound  
states.  but  the scattel‘ine   problem  is  inherently   itsymnietric.  .since  the  waves  come   
in   t'roni  one  side  only.  and  the exponential  notation  (representing  traveling  waves)  is 
 more  natural  in  this context.

82          Chapter 2    Time-lndependetit SCU t odinger Eqnntioti














We can  use  twu  ol  these  to eliminate  C  and  D, and  sulve  the  remaining  two for
B  and  F   see Problem  2.32

. sin(2la) 2kf
e  ""“A
cos(2/fi)  — i             sin(2/‹i)



[2.168]
The transmission  coefficient (T  ——   F '/    A ’-), expressed  in  terms of  the orig-

T           1  +                                      2n          (E +  +o))               [1.169]
4E(E  f-  +o)
Notice  that  T   ——  l  (the  well  becomes  “transparent”)  whenever  the  sine  is  zero,
which  is to say. when
2ff                                                                                           
[2.170]
where ii  is any  integer.  The enerp•ies  for  perfect  transmission,  then, are given  by

2iii(2o)*
which  happen  to  be  precisely  the allowed  energies  for  the iiifiiiite  square  well.  T
is plotted  in Figure  2.19, as a function  of  enerp•y.‘l

Problem 2.29  Analyze  the  odel  bound  state  wave  functions  for  the  finite  square

graphically.  Examine  the two liiTlitinp•  cases. Is there always an odd  bound  state?


' This remarkable  pheiiolBenon  Iris been observed in the laboratory.  in the form of’ the 
Ramsauer- Townsend effect. For an illuininatin•q discussion  sec Richard  W.  Robinett.  
Q_iiriiinrii her/ianir.r. Oxford U.P..  1997.  Section  12.4.1.





Problem 2.30  Normalize  J(x)  in  Equation 2.151,  to determine  the constants  D


Problem 2.31  The Dirac delta function can be thought of as the limiting case of a rectangle of 
area 1, as the height g•oes to infinity  and  the width goes to zero. Show that the delta-function 
well (Equation  2.114) is a “weak”  potential  (even though  it is inhnitely  deep), in the sense 
that  zt  —› 0. Determine  the bound  state energy for the delta-function potential,  by treating 
it as the limit of a finite square well. Check
so                         ion


Problem 2.32  Derive Equations  2.167 and 2.168.    fffr:  Use Equations  2.165 and o so ve         
  an             erms o

sin(la) -1- i -  cos(Io)     '‘1
cos(/o) — / -   sin(Io)


and confirm  Equation  2.169.

mro   e             De ae     ne   he             ssionncoe   cien    or  a  re   a ig sI           
 fe
(same as Equation  2.145, only  with  V(. ) =  +          0 in the region  —a  < x  < o). Treat  
separately  the  three  cases  E   <  No.  E       *’o.  and  E  >  vo (note  that  the wave 
function  inside the barrier is different in the three cases). Par ttal aiisn'ei . For
E      to.‘
2o   2  (        E›)


if z  > 0.
(a)  Calculate  the  reflection  coefficient,  for  the  case  E  <  to,  and  comment  on the 
answer.
(b)   Calculate  the reflection  coefficient  for the case  E  >  Vo-
(c)  For a potential  such  as this,  which  does  not  go back  to zero  to the rip•ht  of the  
barrier,  the transmission  coefficient  is row  slmply   r; •;   A -’  (with  A  the

is is a  eoo   examp e o                                                       c wou      ounce

84         Ch‹ipter 2    Time-Indeyend6lif  Schr‘odinger  Equation












FIGURE 2.20:    Scattcring  from a “cliff” (Problcm 2.35).

incident amplitude and  r  the transmitted amplitude),  because the transmitted


E|'
I       E        A|'

{2.172]
for  E  >  fo-  Hiiit:  You  can figtire  it out  using  Equation  2.98, or—more ele-
p•antly,  but less  iiiformatively—from the  probability  current  (Problem  2.19). is              
         o-’
(d)   For  E  >    o. calculate  the  transmission  coefficient  for the step  potential,  and
check  that  T  +   R  ——  1.

Problem 2.35  A  particle  of  mass  iii  and  kinetic  energy   £   >   0  approaches  an abrupt  
potential  drop  Vo (Figure  2.20).

is just like Problem  2.34, except  that the step now  goes down, instead of  up.
(b)   I  drew  the  fig•rire  so  as  to  make  you  think  of  a  car  approaching  a cliff,  but 
obviously  the  probability  of  “bouncinp•  back”  from  the edge of  a cliff  is far smaller  
than  what  you  got  in (a)—unless  you  re Bugs  Bunny.  Explain  why

potential energy of the car drops discoiirinridffS/y to — Vo. as it passes .   =  0; would  this be 
true for a falling car?
(c)  When a free neutron enters a nucleus, it experiences a sudden  drop in poten- tial energy, 
from  U =  0 outside  to around  —12 MeV (million  electron  volts) inside.  Suppose  a  neutron,  
emitted  with  kinetic  energy  4 MeV  by  a  fission event,  strikes  such  a  nucleus.  What  is  
the  probability  it  will  be  absorbed, thereby  initiating  another  fission?  Hiiit:  You  
calculated  the  probability  of

through  the surface.

FURTHER PROBLEMS FOR CHAPTER 2
Problem  2.36  Solve  the  time-independent  Schriidinger  equation   with  appropri- ate  boundary 
 conditions  for  the  “centered”  infinite  square  well:  V(.x)       0  (for
—ff   <  ñ   W  -J-u),  V(.  )  =   on  (otherwise).  Check  that  your  allowed  energies  are

from  nune  (Equation  2.28)  by  the  substitution  .r  —+   (x  -J- ff)/2  (and  appropriate 
renormalization)   Sketch  your  first  three  solutions,  and  compare  Figure  2.2.  Note

Problem 2.37  A particle in the infinite square  well (Equation  2.19)  has the initial wave 
function


Determine  A,  find  T(.r. r),  and  calculate  (x),  as  a  function  of  time.  What  is  the 
expectation  value of the energy? Hiitt:  sin" 8 and cos” 8 can be rcduced, by repcatcd application 
 of  the  trig•onometric  sum  formulas,  tO  llnear  combinations  of  sin(iii8) and cos(iii8),  
with  iii  =  0. 1. 2.          n.

+Prnhlem  7  3fl   A  partirle nf mass iii  is  in the  grniind  stole nf the infinite sn,iiare  
well (Equation  2.19).  Suddenly  the  well  expands  to  twice  its  original  size—the  right 
wall moving  from  r   to 2s—leaving•  the wave function (momentarily)  undisturbed. The energy  of 
 the  particle  is  now  measured.


/ in  1       4¥r  I  ki

I      s c•     fki    o       oaa r-n r•I      owed nRIo     wec• i  i 11.3     ¥Z I 1•* n   I     
  s r•     I  Ro          wvwrm R

As   I  i As r      mfi         rv off     s m  rv  r  4•1•i     4-
result?
(b)   What  is  the  tie.vt  most  probable  result,  and  what  is  its  probability?
(c)   What   is  the  e.  j›e ’tation  vff/tie  of  the  energ•y‘?   Hiitt:   It  you  find  
yourself confronted  with  an  infinite  series,  try  another  method.

Problem 2.39
(a)   Show  that  the  wave  function  of  a particle  in  the  infinite  square  well  ietums to  
its  original  form  after  a  quantum  revival  time  T       4in  i-/u /i.  That  is: T(.v. T) =  
T(x. 0) for any  state  (itol  just  a stationary  state).
(b)   What  is  the c-lassieal  revival  time,  for a particle  of energ•y  E  botincing•  back and 
 forth  between  the  walls?
(c)   For what  energy  are the two revival  times equal'k"


- The  tact  that  lhe  classical  and  quantum  revival  times  bear’  no  obvious  relation  to  
one  another (and  the  quantulii  one  doesn't  even  depend  on  the  energy)  is  a  curious  
par ‹idohi  SCC  Daniel  Styer.

86         Chapter 2    Time-liidekendent Scl›rodi,tiger Eqii itioti

Problem 2.40  A particle of  mass iii  is in  the potential
(.r  < 0),
—32fi-/rt«      (0 < .r  < o).

(a)   How  many  bound  states are  there?

would  be  found  oufside  the  well  (.r  >  o)?  Answer :  0.542,  so even  though  it is “bound” 
 by  the  well,  it  is more  likely  to  be  found outside  than  inside!

Problem 2.41  A   particle   of   mass   iif    in   the   harmonic   oscillator   potential











for some constant  B. What  is  the smallest  possible  value of  T*

Problem 2.42  Find  the allowed  energies  of  the lili(   harmonic  oscillator
(l/2)ntn›'x-.     for .   >  0,
on.                       for x  <  0.
(This represents, for example.  a spring  that can  be stretched,  but not compressed.)    " fiiif: 
This requires some careful  thought,  but very little actual computation.

+Problem 2.43  In Problem  2.22 you analyzed the stationer    gaussian free particle wave packet. 
Now solve the same problem for the ti ai!eliii¿ gaussian  wave packet, starting  with the initial  
wave function


where l  is a real constant.

furfher Problems [or Chapter 2         87


s »Problem. 2.44  Solve  the  time-independent  Schrodinger  equation  for  a  centered infinite  
square  well  with  a delta-function  barrier  in the middle:



Treat the even and odd wave functions separately. Don't  bother to normalize them. Find  the  
allowed  energies  (graphically,  if  necessary).  How  do  they  compare  with the corresponding  
energies  in  the absence  of  the delta  function?  Explain  why  the odd solutions are nnt 
affected  by the delta function. Comment on  the 1irnitinq• cases a  —›  0 and a  —› on.

Problem 2.45  If   two   (or   more)   distinct“   solutions   to   the  (time-independent) 
Schriidinger  equation  have  the  same  energ•y  E,   these  states  are  said  to  be degen- 
erate.  For  example,  the  free  particle  states  are  doubly  degenerate—one  solution 
representing  motion to the right. and the other motion to the left. But we have never encountered  
 nnrnuilizal›le  degenerate  solutions,  and  this  is no accident.  Prove  the following  theorem: 
 lii oiie diiiiensiraii‘⁵ tlteie are ito degeiierftte  hound states.  Hint. Suppose  there are rtl 
n  solutions,  ti    and  tz.   with  the same energy  E.  Multiply  the Schrt›dinger  equation  
for         by  42.  and  the  Schrodinger  equation  for  J2   by  ¥‹i .
and  subtract,  to  show  that  (t2dJ;   /dx  —  f   dI2/dx)  is  a  constant.  U5e  the  fact
that  for  normalizable  solutions       —+  0 at  I   on  to demonstrate  that  this constant  is 
in fact  zero.  Conc lude  that  J¿    is a multiple  of  Jt  , and  hence  that  the  two 
solutions are  not  distinct.

Problem 2.46  Imagine a bead of mass m  that  slides frictionlessly around a circular wire  ring  
of  circumference  L.   (This  is just  like  a  free  particle,  except  that      (x -J- L)  =   
J(x).)  Find  the  stationary  states  (with  appropriate  normalization)  and  the corresponding  
allowed  energies.  Note  that  there  are ot•o  independent  solutions  for each  energy   ñ„  
—corresponding  to  clockwise  and  counter-clockwise  circulation; call  them  /,   (.  ) and  /,  
 (.i). How  do  you account  for this degeneracy,  in  view of the  theorem  in Problem  2.45 (why  
does  the  theorem  fail,  in  thi.s case)?

+Prob1em  2.47  Attention,:  This  is  a  srrier/y  qu,olitotii•e   problem—no  calculations 
allowed!  Consider  the  “double  squaie  well”  potential  (Figure  2.21).  Suppose  the

”IN   two  solutions  di t't”er  only  by  ‹i  niultiplicnti ve  constant  (so  that.  once  
nonn2lized,  they  differ only  by a phiise  factor ‹'"). they  represent  the sauce physical 
state. and in this sense they arc nor  distinct solutions. Technically,  by “distinct”  I  mean  
“linearly  independent.”
* in  higher  dimensions  such  deycncracy  is  very  common.  as  we shall  see  in  Chapter  4.  
Assume chac  the  potenti‹il  does  not consist  of  isolated  yicces scparated  by  regions  where 
 V'      oo—two  isolated inhnite  squai‘e  wells.  for  instance.  would  givc  rise  to 
ctegencrate  hc›unct  states.  for  which  the  pai-ticle  is citlzcr  ill  the ol\c or  in  the  
other,


P 0           Chaote.r  2     Timr.-lnclr.hr.tident  Sclir'ridi 7f ver  F.Dlffff/oil













e square  we                em
depth  Vq  and  the  width  o  are  fixed,  and large  enough  so  that  several  bound  states

(a)   Sketch  the  ground  state  wave  function      ;  and  the  first  excited  state  /„
(i) for  the case I  — 0. (ii) for /›      ‹i.  and (iii) Ifor I›       u.
(b)   Qualitatlvely, how do the conesponding  energies ($   and E2)  ary, as b goes from  0 to on?  
Sketch  E  (1›)  and  E;(1 ) on  the  same  graph.
(c)   The double  well  is a  very  primitive  one-dimeNsioilal model  for the potential

mon
e  per ei ce      y  an e ec
n  a    ia oi   ie   no e     e      e   wo     e  s  represen

adopt  the  configuratlon  of  minimum  energy.  In  view  of  your conclusions  in (b),  does  the 
 electron  tend  to  draw  the  nuclei  together,  or  push  them  apart? (Of    course,  there  is 
 also  the  internuclear  repulsion  to  consider,  but  that's  a se  arate    robleiu.

ro    e                 n     o   en        (      yo    go     ic  e  pe   a ion         e o   t  
e energ•y    y summing  the series in Equation  2.39, but 1 warned  you (in footnote  15) not to 
try it the  “old  fashioned  way,”  (/f) =      T(.i. 0)*/f T(.r. 0) d.x,  because  the  
discontinu- ous  first  derivative  of  T(x. 0)  renders  the second derivative  problematic.  
Actually,

affords  a much  cleaner  way  to handle  such  anomalies.
(a)   Calculate  the  first  derivative  of  T(.r. 0)  (in  Problem  2.7),  and  express  the 
answer in terms of  the  step function.  P(.i  — ‹i/2), defined  in Equation  2.143.

eqn
oi        o      a  ou
pons     jus      e   nerlorre•on              <
(b)   Exploit  the result of Probleiii  2.24(b) to write the second derivative of T(.r, 0)

(c)   Evaluate  the  integral   J‘ T(.r. 0)* HP  (.v. 0) cl.v,  and  check  that  you  get  the 
same  answer  as before.

further  Problems (or Chapter 2        89


eat
(a)  Show  that

(x,  /) —           )        exp    — 2               —I— 2    (1 +  c"-i“')  +  '" p  — 2oze"’”“*)
ft
satisfies the time-deJ evident  Schrfidiiiger equation for the harmonic oscillator ntial       uati 
            . Here a  is an              nsta  t wi             mensi  ns
length.‘6
(b)   Find  | T (a’. t)|',  and  describe the motion of  the  wave  packet.
lc)   Compute  (x)  and  (p), and check  that Ehrenfest's  theorem  (Equation  1.38) is satisfied.

+Prob1em  2.50  Consider  the moving  delta-function  well:


whcrc  r  is the (constant)  vclocity  of  thc well.




where  E        —iiir-/2fi     is  the  bound-state  energy  of  the  stotionnr)i   delta
function.  Hfiif.  Plug  it  in  and  cider,k  it! Use the result  of  Problem  2.24(b).
(b)   Find  the expectation  valrie of  the Hamiltonian  in  this state, and comment on the result.

+Prob1em 2.51  Consider the potential
V {.v)  =   — ft-o-         ,
th    sech‘(o.i),
where  o  is a positive  constant,  and  “sech”  stands  for  the  hyperbolic  secant.
(a)   Gra  h  this potential.
(b)   Check  that  this potential  has  the  ground  state
to(i) =  A sech(rim).
and  find  its  energy.  Normalize  /q,  arid  sketch  its  graph.

""This rare example  o1‘ an exact clt›sed-form  solution  to the  time-dependent Schriidinger  
equation was discovered  by  Schrodinger-  himself.  in  1926.


90          Chapter 2    Time-lndepetldeist Schrodinger  Equ‹ition

(c)  Show  that  the function
— ‹f tanh(


(where  k            2    E/li,  as  usual)  solves  the  Schrodinger  equation  for  any



ink  i ejected  ii›ci i›e  (i.e.,  no  ter in  exp(—i1.r)).  What  is  the  asymptotic   form of  
Jt(.i)  at  1arp•e   Jiosirive  .v*  What  are  R  and  T,   for  this  potential?  Com- ment:  
This is a famous example of a reflectionless potential—every incident particle,  regardless  of its 
energy. passes right  throup•h.‘⁷
l•rob1em  2.52  The  scattering  matrix.  The  theory  of   scattering  p•eneralizes  in

(Region  I),  V (.  ) =   0,  so


To the right (Region  III),  P(x)  is again  zero, so
J(.r) =  Fe' “”  +   Ge  '                                       [2.174]
In  between  (Region  II), of  course,  I can't  tell  you  what      is until  you  specify  the 
eouation,  the general  solution  has p•ot  to be of  the  tonic


will  be  four  boundary  conditions  (two  joining  Reg•ions  I  and  U,   and  two joining






Region I                          Region II                       Region III

FIGURE 2.22:    Scattering  from  an  arbitrary  localized  potential  IV(x)      0  except  in
Region 11); Problem 2.52.

’7R. E. Cr•iiidall  and  B. R. Litt. .4iiirzifs i›J’P/ivsir.x. 146. 4ñ8  (1983 j.
*“Scc anv  hcnk ‹›n dit‘feicntial cquations—loi  cxainplc. 1. L. Van Iwa‹zdcn. Ofr/ir/rt/1’  
IJ|ifc•i eiiriril E)ii‹iti‹›it» i‹'/r/i Niiiiic•ri‹’‹i/  T‹›c'liiiiqiie.r. Harc‹›urt  Br‹tcc 
Jt»’anovicli.  San  Dicgo,  I9g5,  Chaptcr  3.

further Prol›leiiis /o/’ Chapter 1        91
Regions II and III). Two of  these can  be used  to eliminate  C  and  D,  and  the other two can  
be “solved”  for  B  and  r   in  terms  of  A  and  G:
B  ——  S    A +  S    G.       F  =  S21A +   Sz;G.
The  four coefficients  S; j,  which  depend  on I  (and  hence on  E), constitute  a 2 x 2

you  the  outgoinp•  amplitudes    B  and  F)  in  terms  of  the  incoining•  ainplltudes  (A
and  G):
[2.175]
In  the  typical  case  of  scattering  from  the  left,  G  =  0,  so  the  reflection  and  
trans- mission  coefficlents  are




or scattering               e rig
F |-
, an

(a)   Construct   the   S-matrix   for   scattering   from   a  delta-function   well   (Equa- tion 
2.114).
(b)   Construct  the S-matrix  for the finite square  well (Equation  2.145). firm: This requires  
no new  work,  if  you carefully  exploit  the syniiiietry  of the probleIn.
s       Problem 2.53  The  transfer  matrix.  The  S-matrix  (Problem  2.52)  tells  you  the 
G)—Equation  2.175.  For  some  purposes  it  is  more  convenient  to  work  with  the
transfer  matrix,  M.  which  gives  you  the  amplitudes  to  the  riy/ir  of  the potential
(F  and  G)  in  terms of  those  to  the  /e,/f    A and  B):

[2.178]

(a)   Find  the  four’  elements  of  the  3finatrix,  in  terms  of  the  elements  of  the 
S-matrix,  and  vice  versa.  Express  R  ,  T  ,  R, ,  and  T,  (Equations  2.176  and 2.177)  in 
 terms  of  elements  of  the  ñf-matrix.
(b)   Suppose  you  have a potential  consistinp• of  two isolated  pieces (Fig•iire  2.23). Show   
that   the  ñfiiiatrix   for  the  combination   is  the  pi c›duct   of  the  two M-matrices  for 
each  section  separately:
M       M›M/ .                                            [2.179j
(This  obviously  generalizes  to  any  number  of  pieces,  and  accounts  for  the usefulness  of 
 the  M-matrix.)





M1


FIGURE 2.23:     A potential  consisting of  two isolated pieces (Problem 2.53).

(cl   Construct  the  M-matrix  for scattering  from  a single delta-function  potential at  point 
o:

(d)   By  the method  of  pan (b),  find  the  M-matrix  for  scattering  from  the  double
delta  function



Problem 2.54  Find  the ground  state energy  of the harmonic  oscillator,  to five sig- nificant  
digits,  by  the “wag-the-dog”  method.  That  is,  solve Equation  2.72 numer- ically,  varying   
K   until  you  get  a  wave  function  that  gocs  to  zcro  at  largc  {.   In Matheinatica,  
aDuropriate  int›ut  code  would  be
Plot[Evaluate[u[x]/.NDSolve[(u  [x]  -(x²  -  K)*u[x]  ==  0,   u[0]  ==  1,
u’[01 == 0), u[x], {x, 10", 10), MaxSteps  ->  10000]], {x, a, b),

(Here  (ri  1  j is  the  hnriznntal  ranoe  nf  the  graph   and  (c  r/)  is the  vertical  
range— start  with a  =  0, 1      10,  r      — 10, d =  10.) We know  that  the correct  solution 
 is K      1, so you might start  with a “guess” of  K      0.9. Notice  what  the “tail” of fhe 
wave function  does. Now try  K      1.1, and note that the tail flips over. Somewhere in  between  
those  values  lies  the  correct  solution.  Zero  in  on  it  bv  bracketinp•  K tighter  and  
tig•hter.  As  you  do so, you  may  want  to adjust  n, l , r,  and  d, to zero
111   UTI   II lD  L.1 Ub  b-U   YUl   {)t)ll1t.


Problem  2.55  Find  the  first  thi ee  excited  state  enei gies  (to  five  sip•nificant  
dip•its) for  the  harlTlonic  oscillator.  by  wagp•inp•  the  dogs (Problem  2.54).  For  the  
first  (and third) excited  state  you  will  need  to set  «[0] ==   0. ii'[0]     =   1.


the  infinite  sfiuare well, bY  wagging  the dos. Hint.  Refer to Problem  2.54, makinp• 
tlp}iropriate  chanp•es  to  the  differential  equation.  This  time  the  condition  you  are 
looking  for is ii(l) = 0.






























3.1  HILBERT SPACE
In  the  last  two chapters  we have  stumbled  on  a number of interesting  properties  of simple 
quantum  systems.  Some of these are “accidents)”  features of specific poten- ia s      e e  en  
spacing  o   energ     e  e s   or     e          on c  os      a or    or ex    ip e

for all  (the  uncertainty  principle,  for instance,  and  the orthogonality  of  stationary 
states). The purpose of this chapter is to recast the theory in a more powerful form,

is to make coherent  sense of  what  we have already  discovered  in  particular cases.
Quantum theory is based on two constructs: n›tn!e functions and ol•erntors.The s a e o  a sys e    
is represen e     y   s  wa  e   unc ion  o  s     a   e   are repre  en e hv  nneratnrs   
Mathematicallv   wnve  fitnctinnx  xatisfv  the  r!efininp  rnnrlitinns  fnr
abstract  vectors,  and  operators  act  on  them  as  linear  transformations.  So  the natural 
language of quantum  mechanics  is linear algebra.'
But it is not, I suspect, a form of lineai algebra with which you are immediately familiar. In an  
N-dimensional  space it is simplest  to represent  a vector,  |a), by the N-tuple of its 
components. {‹i„),  with respect  to a specified  orthonormal  basis:


|o)   —+  a



' II  you  have  never  studied  lineilr  algebra.  you  should  read  the  Appendix  belore  
continuilig.

The  inner  product,  (a |§). of  two  vectoivs  (generalizing  the  dot  product  in  three


Linear transl'orniations, T,  are represented  by matrices (with respect to the specified basis), 
which act on vectors (to produce new vectors) by the ordinary rules of matrix multiplication.


|g)      7|o)  —+  b — Ta —                                                                         
  [3.3]

!N I       !N?           “            !N N              N
But  the "vector's"  we encounter  ln quantuiii  mechanics  are (for  the  most  part)
ftmctiotis, and  they  live in inJrire-dimensional .spaces. For them  the N-tuple/matrix

dimensional  case  can  be  problematic.  (The  underlying  reason  is  that  whereas  the attire  
sum in Equation 3.2 always exists, an iiifiiiite  sum—or an integral—may  not converge, in which 
case the inner product does not exisi, and any argument invo1ving• inner rirridiicts  is 
iiriiiediatelv  sriunert     Min even  thouoh m‹nst  ‹nf the terminnln«v  and notation  should  be 
faiTliliar,  it  pays to approach  this subject  with caution.
The  collection  of  riff   functions  of  .r  con.stitutes  a  vector  space,  but  for  our

function  T   must  be  rim iiuiIi‹.eel :
(    IN |'‹I.       \.
I

›
/”(.  )     such  that              |  f"(.  ) |' ‹I.c       oo.                                
[3.4]
constitutes  a  (much  smaller)  vector  space  (see  Problem  3.I(a)).  Mathematicians call  it  
L;{n. 1  ), physicists  call  it  Hilbert  space."  In quantum  mechanics,  then,

Wave  functions  live in Hilbert  space.                                 [3.5]


- Fol  us. the limits (ii •ilicl  /›) will  aliviost  alwiiys  be      w.   but  we  might an well  
kccp things  more
general  1or  the  moniclJl.
-  i ecnnicail3'. a  rtiincit .spiice 1s  a complete inner  proouci space. ‹tnu  tne  coiiectlon  
or square- inteyrablc  l'unctions  is  only  riri‹•  r.rriiii¿›/‹  of’ a  Hilbert  space—indeed,  
every  finite-dimensional  vector space  is trivially  a  Hilbci t sp:ice. But  since  L›  is the 
arena  tif quantum  mechanics.  it's  what  physicists generally  iite‹iii  when  they  say  
"Hilbert  space."  By  the  way,  the  word  complete  here  means  that  any Ciiuchy sequence of’ 
functions  in Hilbert space converges  to :i  l'unction  that  is also in the space: it has no 
"l1ole.s"  in  it.  just  as  the  .sct  ol" all  re.il  Muillhel.s  has  i1t›  h‹ Ice  (fry  
ct›ntrast.  the  space  ol" all  jso/\'no/x/r//z, lo‹’  example,   like  the  set  of  :ill  
/'‹/f/r›/tn/   number's.  certainl}   c/res  have  holes  in  it).  The  completeness ct’ a  
.qv‹/‹-‹   I ‹is  nc›ll  ing  to  dn  with  the  cnizzplctcncs.s  (.manic  wnrd.  unlclrtunately) 
of  a  .ter  ‹›f.fi.ii  cii‹›ii.‹. which  is  tlme  prt›pcrty  ttlat  and   t›thcr  fulJcticn  can  
bc  cxprc.seed  as  a  linear  combination  cf” then  .

Sectioti  3.1:  I-Gilbert  Space          95

We  define  the  inner  nroduct  of  two functions.   text  and  r fxâ.  as follows:

[3.6]

If   f   and  g  are  both  square-integrable  (that  is,  if  they  are  both  in  Hilbert  
space), their inner product  is guaranteed  to exist (the integral  in Equation  3.6 converges  to 
a  finite number).'  This follows  from  the integral Schwarz  inequality:'



You can check for yourself that Equation  3.6 satisfies all the conditions  for an inner product  
(Problem  3.1(b)).  Notice  in  particular  that




Moreover,  the inner  product  of    (.i)  with  itself,
[3.8]


[3.9)

is  i eal  and  non-negative;  it’s  zei o  only    when  ,/’(.v)      0.
A  function  is said  to  be  normalized  if  its  inner  product  with  itself  is  1;  two 
functions  are  orthogonal  if  their  inner  product  is 0; and  a  set  of functions,  (fi  ), is 
 urinunuriiiai  ii  Lucy  are  norm‹iiizcO  ano  inuiu‹iiiy  ortnugun‹ii.


Finally,  a set  of  functions  is complete  if  any  oilier  function  (in Hilbert  space) can be  
expressed  as  a  linear  combination  of  them:

1 tl




‘In   Chapter     we  were obliged  on  occasion  to  work  with  functions  that  were  itnf  
normalizable. 'inch  functions  lic out.vir/e  Hil bert  sp:ce, and  wc are  guing  to  have  to  
handle  them  with  special  care, as you  wit)  see short ly. For the  moment. 1 shall  assume  
that  all  the  functions  we encounter   me  in  Hilbert

"For  a  proof.  see  F.   Ricsz  and  B.   Sz.-Nagy.  Fi‹ii‹'fiortcd  Aitri/j-sis   (Ungcr,  New   
York,   1955), Section  21.  In  a  fiiiite  dimensional   vector  space  the  Schwarx  inequality, 
 | {a|§11'  s    I• I•) lBIB) easy  to prove (see  Problem  A.5).  But  that  proof  assumes  thc  
existence  of‘ the  inner  products,  which  is precisely  what  we  are  trying  to esirib/i.th  
here.
'What  about  a  function  that  is  zero  evelywhere  except  at  a  few  isolated  points?  The  
integral (Equation  3.9)  would  still  vanish,  even  though  the  tunclion  ilsell’ does  not.  
If  this  bothers  you,  you snoum  nave  neen  a main  major.  in pny.sics  sucn  patnoiogicai  
functions  no not  occur,  nut  in any  case,  in Hilbert  space  two  functions  that  have  the  
s:tme  square  integral  are  consideled  equivalent.  Technically, vectofs  lH  Hl lbert  space  
represent  equivalence  classes  of  tunctions.

If the functions {./;, (.r)) are orthonorinal, the coefficients are p•iven by Fourier's trick:
[3.12]
as  you  can  check  for   youivself.   I   anticipated   this  terminolop•y,   of  course,   back 
in  Chapter  2.  (The  stationary   states  for  the  infinite  square  well  (Equation  2.28) 
constitute  a  coiiiplete  orthonoimal  set  on  the  interval  (0. n);  the  stationary  states 
for the harmonic  oscillator  (Equation  2.67  or 2.85) are a complete  orthonormal  set on  the  
interval  (—oo, oo).)

Problem 3.1
(a)  Show  that  the  set  o1 all  square-integiable functions  is a  vector space  (refer to 
Section  A.1  for  the  definition).  Niiif.'  The  main  problem  is  to show  that the  sum  of  
two  souaie-inte-•rab1e 1'unctions  is  itself  souare-inteerable.  Use Equation  .3.7. 1s the set 
of  ulI ii‹›i nmlized  functions a vector space?
(b)   Show  that  the  intep•ra1  ln  Equation  3.6  satisfies  the  conditions  for  an  inner 
product  (Section  A.2).

+Problem 3.2
{aj   rur   wn‹ii  r‹inge  ui   r   is  inc  i unc iiun   / (.i j  —  .i "   in  riii0cri  splice,  
uii  rue
interval  (0. 1)'? Assume  i  is real. but not  necessarily  positive.
(bl   For  the  snecific  case  v  =    I /2.  is   f(.i I  in  this  Hilbert  snace?  What  about
.v f(.    )’* How  about  (d/d   ) | (.r)?


3.2  OBSERVABLES

3.2.1  Hermitian Operators

The expectation  value  of  an  obsei vable  Q(.r, p)  can  be expressed  very  neatly  in 
inner-product  notation:7

[3.13]


7Remember  that       is the“ O  Cl”‹1tc9f  Ct7listructcd  l‘l-one  9   by  the  replacement  p     
»  /   -    (It  f i )‹1 fd.v.
These operator's  arc  linear.  in  the  sen.se  tli‹tt

J[‹i/(.i) + my(.  )j  == ‹i    .f( i”) +   /›    g(.\”).

/”O@ aIiy  functions  ,/  :\l1d  ,y  UAU  i\Iiy  complex  numhei's  ci  anJ  /›. They  constitutc  
liii«ni  ii uii.s)r›i-iii‹iii‹›iis
(Sccli‹›n  A..3)  t›n  thc  s|›.tcc  ol' :tll  luMctioM.s.  Ht› \›cvc*l’.  rllc}  sclncfiiTjes  cal 
ry  a  l”unction  /it,t/dr  Hilbcrt





Now,  the outcome  of  a  measurement  has  got  to  be  i eal, and  so,  ri {orfioi i, is  the
civera¿e  of  many  measurements:

[3.14]



[3.15]


obsei»‹ihles   have  the  very  special  property  that



We call such operators  hermitian.


f   pg) =  (    /’|g)     for a)l  {(.r) and  all ,#(x).                    [3.17]

But  it  turns  out,  in  spite  of  appearances,  that  this  is  perfectly  equivalent  to  my 
definition  (Equation  3.16),  as  you  will  prove  ill  Problem 3.3.  So  use  whichever you  
like. The essential  point  is  that  a  heriTlitian  operator  can  be  applied  either  to the  
first  member  of  an  inner  product  or  to  the  second,  with  the  same  result,  and 
herinitian operators naturally  arise in quantuln  mechanics because their expectation values  are 
real:





*e
i  dx
1 used  integration  by  parts,  of  course,  and  threw  away  the  boundai y  teriii  for  the 
usual reason: If  /(.r) and ,p(.v) are square integrable, they must go to zero at     no.‘



Actually.  this  is  not  qttilc  ti uc.  A.s  I  nlcntioil  in  Ch‹iytei’  1.  tI1eie  cxi.sl  
pathc›l‹›yical  I”unctioils Lhat  urc  squyre-intcgr‹iblc  but  It›  /ir›/  go  tt›  zer‹›  at  
infinity,  Ht›\vcvci‘.  buoh  lunctions  do  not  urine  in Why.sics.  and  it“ ynu  are  worriccl  
abt›ul  it  \vc  will  simply  restrict  the  d‹›niailJ  of” ‹›ur  c›pcr•tlc›rs  to exclude thcin.  
On  /i/i/rr  intervals.  though.  ycu  reall}'  cI‹›  ha›’c  t‹›  bc  m‹›rc  c.trclul   \vitl›  
tlme   bcundaiy  tci ms.
and  on  operatni-  thai  i.s  hermitian  ‹›n  (—cc. oc)  rn:iy  //‹›/  be  heiifiigit}}1  011  t0  
C's)  nl-  (—yy,    1.  IN yuu“rc
\vondcrin‹*  aht›ut  thc infinite  sauaic  well   it's sat"est  to  think  t›I" those  y .ivc  
tu»ctinns  as  iesidin•  nn  the
infinite  line —they  jusr  happen  tn  he  -‹ /‹/  nut.side  (0. ‹/).




and  it does not  represent  a possible observable.

Problem 3.3  Show  that  if  (/i | Q_/i)  =   (Q_/i |/i}  for all functions  lt  (in Hilbert  
space),
then   (f    Q_p)         p(     [  g)   for  all        and   g  (i.e.,   the  two  definitions   
of  “hermi-
tian”—Equations 3.16  and  3.17—are  equivalent).  Hint:  First  let  /i  =    J‘  -1- g,   and 
then  let  Jr  =       +   ig.

Problem 3.4
(a)   Show  that  the sift»  of  two  hermitian  operators  is  hermitian.
(b)   Suppose       is hermitian,  and n  is  a complex  number.  Under  what  condition

(c)   When  is  the  ptodyCt  Of  two  hennitian  operators  hermitian?
(d)   Show  that  the  position  operator  (.t  =   .r)  and  the  hamiltonian  operator  (H
—(li -/2m  d-Id. °- W  V lx 1   are  hermitian.

Problem 3.5  The hermitian conjugate  (or adjoint) of an operator      is the oper-



(f    pg         p  {  g)    (for all  {  and ,9).
(A  hermitian  operator.  then. is equal  to its hermitian  conjugate:  Q  ——  Q“' .)
(a)   Find  the  hermitian  conjug•ates  of .r, i, and  d/dx.

[3.20]
(b)   Construct  the hermitian conjugate of  the harmonic  oscillator  raising operator,
«+  (Equation  2.47).
(c)   Show  that  (    A)T            R“   ’.

3.2.2  Determinate States
Ordinarily.  when  you  measure  an  observable   Q  on  an  ensemble  of  identically prepared  
systems,  all  in  the  same  state  T,  you  do  not  get  the  same  result  each time—this  is  
the  iitdetermiiiac y  of  quantum  mechanics.’  Question:  Would  it  be

p OSS    i or  ii    iG     pFwy‹:ii ii   a    ot a3i   ii
t4Ci i    iici u t
i  c. f         iJiidsLliiii£iiiifi i   Gi                i 3    viiii   iiir Hi    iCi     i Hi  
ii  lii
the  same  value  (call  it  q)?  This  would  be,  if  you  like,  a  determinate  state,  for the 
observable  Q_ . (Actually,  we  already  know  one  example:  Stationary  states  are detemiinate  
states  of  the  Hamiltonian;  a  measurement  of  the  total  energy,  on  a

"I'm  talking aboUt  criiiipc'f‹•iif  iTicasurements, of course—it‘s  always possible  to in‹ikc a 
iiiixfri£e. and  simply  get  the  wron•g  answer.  but  that's  not  the  fault  tel’ quantum  
mechanics.

Section 3.2:  Ofiserrofi/es        99

particle  in the stationary  state  T„, is certain  to  yield  the corresponding  “allowed” energy
Well. the standard deviation of  Q. in a determinate state, would be z.eio, which
i s to say,


(Of course. if every  measurement  gives ‹;, their average is also q:  (Q)  — q. I also used  the 
fact  that  Q, and  hence also  Q — q,   is a liermitiaii  operator,  to move one factor over to 
the first term in the inner product.) But the only function whose inner product  with  itself  
vanishes  is 0. so


This is the eigenvalue equation for the operator     ; T  is an eigenfunction  of     , and a  is 
the corresponding  eigenvalue.  Thus

Determinate states are eigenfunctions of     .                   [3.23]

Mcasuremcnt  of  Q_  on such  a state is ccrtain  to yield  the cigcnvaluc,  q.
Note  that  the eigeni «fire  is a mmthei  (not an operator or a function). You can multiply  any  
eigenfunction  by  a constant,  and  it is still  an eigenfunction, with  the same eigenvalue.  
Zero does  not count  as an  eigenfunctiun  (we exclude it  by  defi- nition—otherwise evers  
number would  be an eig•envalue.  since  Q_ 0 =  q 0 =  0 for any operator  Q_  and  all q). But  
there's  nothing  wrong•  with  zero as an eigenvofife. The collection  of  all  the cig•envaIues  
of  an operator is called  its spectrum.  Some- times two (or more) linearly independent 
eigenfunctions share the sane eigenvalue; in that case  the spectrum  is said  to be degenerate.
For example,  determinate  states  of  the  total  energy  are eip•enfunctions of  the 
Nainiltonian:
H     ——  E$.                                               [3.24]
which  is  precisely  the  time-independent  Schriidinp•er  equation.  In  this  context  we use 
the letter € for the eig•envalue,  and the lower case      for the eig•enfunction (tack on  the  
factor  exp(—i Mr/fi)  to  make  it  T,   if  you  like;  it's  still  an  eigenfunction of  H).



Example 3.1    Consider  the operator
d d Q



[3.25]
where d› is the usual Do1ar coordinate in two dimensions. (This operator might arise in  a  
physical  context  if  we  were  studying  the  bead-on-a-rinp•; see  Problem  2.46.) 1s      
hennitian?  Find  its eigenfunctions and eigenvalues.

100         Chattet  3    For›ii i/isnr

Solution:  Here we are working  with functions  /‘(Q) on the $»iie  interval 0 < Q  <

/‘(d› -   2s)       /’(Q).                                        i3.261




so u  is neriiiitian i tnis time tne t›ounciary ter in disappears Dy virtue of equation  ñ.2ñj.
The eigenvalue  equation,




has  the General  solution
:    /”la› = r.log›.
[3.27]


[3.28]


Equation  3.26  restricts  the possible  values of  the ‹j:

6         '           -        )                                   -           .   +         .    + 
    As  .  •  .


[3.29]

The spectrum  of  this operator is  the set  of  all integ•ers,  and  it  is nondep•enerate.



Q  is  the  aziiniithal  angle  in  polar  coordinates,  and  the  functions  are  subject  to 
Equation  3.26.  Iss Q  her iiiitian?  Find  its eigenfunctions and  eigenvalues.  What  is
THE  S]3RL II UIF I  OI         I   lS    ITU   h    CL.tl U 11.1  LlCJ(iHCr•:t IT')




1.1   FTSFWfiT TROTTING  WF A I-TFRA/fTTfAN  MPFR ATTR

inr  attention  is  tnus  directed  to  the ei,qeii{tiitcttou.s ‹›{  her ntlticm o  ei ator.s  
tpnys- really:  determinate  states  o1  obsei vables).  These  fall  into  two  categories:  If  
the specti'uni is discrete (i.e., the elp•envalues  are separated  from one another)  then the 
eqg•eni‘uy  ct ops lies in H  be       aces andptheypcog  s  tute Jphys callyp reallzablepstatges

the eip•enfunctions  are  not  noiaiializable,  and  they  do  not  represent  possible  wave 
functions  (though   /iiie«r  c omhiiuitioii.s  o1’  them—involving  necessarily   a  spread in  
eigenvalues—may  ne  norinaiizaDleJ.  voice  operators  nave  a  discrete  spectrum only  (for 
example,  the Hamiltonian  for  the  harmonic  oscillator),  some  have  only  a continuous  
spectrums  (for  example.  the  free  particle  Hamiltonian),  and  some  have both  a  discrete  
part  and  a  continuous  parl  (for  example,  the  Hamiltonian  for  a

Section  3.3:   Eigeii[imctions o[u  Hermitian  Operator           101

finite square  well). The discrete case is easier to handle, because the relevant  inner products 
are p•uaranteed  to exist—in fact. it is very similar to the finite-dimensional theory (the 
eigenvectors  of a hermitian  iirirri.v). I’ll treat the discrete case first, and then  the 
continuous  one.

3.3.1  Discrete Spectra
Mathematically, the normalizable  eip•enfnnctions of a hermitlan  operator  have two

Theorem 1:  Their eigenvofuefi  are i eal.
uppose


(i.e.,  ./’(.r)  is an eigenf'unction of      ,  with  eigenvalue  q),  and'⁰


(     is hermitian).  Then


(cy  is a nmutter  , so  I comes outside the integral.  and because the first function in the  
inner product  is complex  conjugatcd  (Equation  3.6), so too  is  thc q  on the right).  But  (   
 | /’)  cannot  be zero (f(.v) =  0 is not  a legal eigenfunction), so q  =  q*,  and  hence  ry  
i.s  real.     QED
This  is  comforting:  If  you  measure  an  observable  on  a  particle  in  a  determinate state, 
you  will  at  least get  a real  number.
Theorem 2:    Eip•enfui1ctions  belonp•inp•  to  distinct  eip•envalues  are  orrJio-




and      is hermitian. Then  (/  |   ,g)  =   (    /  |,g), so


(ap•ain,  the  inner  prodncts  exist  because  the  ei*enfunctions  are  in  Hilbert space  by  
assumption).  But  rJ  is  real  (front Theorem  1), so if q'  /   q  it must be  that  (f|p) = 0.  
  QED

”It  i.s  here  that  we  a.ssunic  the  cigcnl’rinc.tions inc  in  Hilbci I  Stacc—nthcw’isc  the  
inner grnduct might  not  exist  tit  all.

102         Chntiter 3    Eornnilism

That's  why  the  stationm'y  states  of  the  infinite  square  well.  for  example,  or  the

with  distinct  eigenvalues.  But  this  property  is not peculiar  to them, or even  to the 
Hamiltonian—the same  holds for detei'ininate states  of  niiJ'  observable.
Unfortunately, Theorem  2  tells  ris  nothing  about  degenerate  states  (c '  ——  q). However,  
if  two  (or  more)  eigenfiinctions  share  the  same  eigenvalue,  any  lin- ear  combination   
of  tlieni  is  itself  an  eigenfunction,  with  the  same  eigenvalue (Problem  3.7(a)),  and  we 
 can  rise  the  Gram-Schmidt  orthogonalization  proce-

subspace.  It  is almost  never necessary  to do this explicitly  (thank  God!),  but  it  can 
always  be done  in principle.  So  even  iii  i/ie pre.seiice  o[’clepeiiei etc. y  the 
eig•enfunc- tions  can  be  c'ltoseii   to  be  orthogonal,  and  in  setting  up  the  
foriiialisin  of  quantum mechanics  we  shall  assume  that  this  has  already  been done.  That  
licenses  the use of Fourier's  trick,  which depends  on  the orthonorinality  of  the  basis  
functions.
in  a crime-dimensional  vector  space  tne  eigenvectors  or  a  hermitian  matrix have  a  third  
 fundamental   property:   They   span   the  space  (every   vector  can  be expressed   as  a  
linear  combination   of  them).   Unfortunately,   the  proof  does  not g•enera1ize  to 
infinite-diiTlensional spaces.  But  the property  itself  is essential  to the

as an ruioin  (or,  more precisely.  as a restriction  on  the class of hermitian  operators that  
can  represent  observables):

Axiom:    The  eigenfunctions  of  an  observable  operator  are  comf›lrte:   Any function  (in  
Hilbert   space)  can  be  expressed   as  a  linear  combination   of theiii."

Problem 3.7
(a)   Suppose  that   /’(.r)  and  ,y(.i)  are  two  eigenfunctions  of  an  operator      ,  with 
the same eip•envalue   y.  Show  that  any  linear combination  of  f  and g  is itself

(b)   Check  that   /(.v)  =   exp(x)  and  ,9(x)  =   exp(—.i)  are  eigenfunctions  of  the 
operator  d'/d.v',  with  the  same  eigenv‹alue.  Con5truct  two  linear  combina- tions of  J‘  
and  g  that  are or tlto,9•‹›ii‹il  eigenfunctions on  the interval  (— 1. 1).



1.1 P. A. M. Dii‹ic.  Tlu•  Priiu:i;›l‹•s  r›/’ Qiuwiuiit  /kfec'/Carrie's.  Ox I’ot‹!  University  
Press.  New  York
( l95h).
I* In  swine  .specilic  ca.scs  coilJpletcncss  is  |Jrovablc   (wc   kn‹›w   that   the  
stationary   states  ot”  the infinite  square   well.  Koi   cxai11|›lc.   :Hc  complete,   
because  cl’  Dii ichlei’.s   tI1cni'cn›).   It   is  a  liitlc  «wk- ward  tc›  c‹ill  .something  
ate   '‹ixi‹›n1“   that  i5'  y›/z›\’‹i/›/r  ii1  .sems  ca.se.s.  but  I  don‘t  know  tt  bcttcr  
way  ie handle  it.


Section 3.3:  Eigerrfunctioiis o[u   Heriniti‹ui  Operator          103


em
(a)  Check  that the eigenvalues of the hermitian operator in Example  3.1 are real.

(b)   Do the same for the operator  in Problem  3.6.




normalizable.  and  the proofs of Theorems  1  and  2 fail, because  the inner products may  not 
exist. Nevertheless, there is a sense in  which  the three essential  properties (rea    y   or   
og•ona  ty   an    coinp e ene  s            o                          es    o approa











This is not square-integrable, for nity  (complex)  value of  p—the momentum oper- ator  ha.s  no  
eigenfunctions  in  Hilbert  space.  And  yet,  if  we  restrict  ourselves  to

Problem.s  2.24(a)  and  2.26,







[3.32]

then
[3.33]

which is strikingly reminiscent of ii iiu orthonormality (Equation  3.10)—the indices are now  
continuous  variables,  and  the  Kronecker  delta  has  become a  Dirac  delta, but otherwise it 
looks just the same. I’11 call Equation  3.33 Dirac orthonormality.

Most iiiiportant, the eigenfunctions are coiiip/etc, with the sum (in Equation 3.11)

the form


The expansion  coefficient (now a /i‹rcrion, c(p)) is obtained, as always, by Fourier's trick:


Alternatively,  you  can  poet  them  from  Plancherel's  theorem  (Equation  2.102),  for
the expansion  (Equation  3.34)  is nothing  brit a Fourier  transform.

The eigenfunctions of  momentum  (Equation  3.32)  are  sinusoidal,  with  wave- 1enp•th
[3.36]

This  is  the old  de  Broglie formula  (Equation  1,39),  which  I  promised  to  prove  at the 
appropriate time. It turns out to be a little more subtle than de Broglie imagined, because we now  
know  that there is actually no sifc/i //ring  as a particle with  deter- nfinate  momentum.  But 
we could make a normalizable wave  packet  with a narrow rang•e of  momenta,  and  it is to such  
an object  that  the de Broglie  relation  applies.
What  are  we to make of  Example 3.2?  Although  none of  the eigenfunctions of      lives  in  
Hilbert  space,  a certain  family  of  them  (those  with  real  eigenvalues) reside  in  the  
nearby  “sut›urbs,    with  a  Kind  of  quasi-normalizability.  lhey  do not represent  possible  
physical  states, but they are still very  useful (as we have already seen, in our study  of  
one-dimensional scatterinp•).'”

Example 3.3    Find  the eigenfunctions and eip•envalues of  the position operator. Solution:  Let  
g j.{x   be the eigenfunction  and  J'  the eip•envaIiie:

=             x, (r) =  r 8,-(--•
[3.37]

w'hat   aooui   tile   clgenlUNc ions   » ith   ›ir›iireai   ci  elzv‹iiuc.s     i izesc   are   
not   met eiy   nun-
normalizable—they actually blew up at T oc. Functions in what I callcd the “suburb.s” of Hilbert 
spuce
\ tile  entiro  nJeHcp‹›Nttin  area  is  sometimes  callea  a   I lggea  I-tiloert  space  :  see.  
Icr  exampie,    cslle B‹lllentine*s  Qiini›f/i/i›  Mecliniiic.s.’  A MoJr/°/›  TJrvelopmeHf,  
WcrlJ Scientific,  1998)  have  the  property thtit although Ltley havc nc (finite) inner grncluct 
with f/›rm  e/i’c3, thcy Jo admit inner pr‹›ctucts  with all members cf Hilbert space. This is /io/ 
 true for eigcnfuncticns cf ¿  wiUi ncnreaJ eigenvalues. In pai-ticu- lai°. T showed Lhat the 
mnincntujn cperatci‘ is hcrmitian/ni-.//i//r'f/oils i» HillJerl  sf›nce. but the argument dcpenclcd 
on dropping the boundary  term (in Equ‹iticn 3. I9). That icrm is still zcrc if ,p i.s an 
eigenlunc-
Go1iof#vithazc:i1eigcnvalue(as longasj’ is in Hilheft sp:ice), butnotifthe eigenvalue hasaiiimag- 
inary  part.  In  this sense m/¿•  cnmglcx  nnmher  is an  eigenvalue  nt" thc ngeratnr    , t›n\  
nnly  ›-co/  nuizzhei urc cigen ’alucs cf  the /tcrfnifin/i  operator  /  —thc ethers lic cut.sidc  
the space nvcr wl\ich     is hcriYlitian.




Here  y  is  a  fixed  number  (for  any  given  eigenfunction),  but  .   is  a  continuous a   e  
      a    unciono        as    eproperty     a         ipying       y      s    esa    e
as multiplying  it by the constant  y? Obviously  it's got to be   eio, except at the one point .r 
=  i ; in fact, it is nothing  but  the Dirac delta  function:


s      e    e e genva   e  7      o   e rea      e e gen  u ie i  n  are no  sq  are  n ep•ra   e






we  pie


en

, SO


These eigenfunctions are also complete:





with


(trivial,  in this case, but  you can  p•et it from Fourier's  trick if  you  insist).

[3.42]


If  the spectrum  of a  hermitian  operator  is c’oiir/iiifdffS  (so the eigenvalues  are labeled  
by a continuous  variable—y  or y. in  the examples: z., generically, in what

they do not represent  possible physical states; nevertheless. the eigenfunctions with real  
eigenvalues  are Dir oc  orthonormalizable and complete  (with  the sum  now  an



Problem 3.9

(a)  Cite a Hamiltonian  from Chapter  2 (other  than  the harmonic  oscillator)  that has only  a 
discrete  spectrum.
(b)  Cite a Hamiltonian from Chapter  2 (orher than the free particle) that has only
a  con riitlfofzr  spectrum.

(c)  Cite  a  Hamiltonian  from  Chapter 2  (ct/ter  than  the  finite  square  well)  that


Problem  3.10  Is  the ground  statc  of  the  infinite  .square  well  an  eigenfunction  of 
momentum?  If so,  what  is its momentum?  Tf  not, ir/ij  not?


3.4  GENERALIZED  STATISTICAL INTERPRETATION
In Chapter  1 I showed  you  how to calculate the probability  that a particle would  be found  in 
a  particular  location,  and  how  to determine  the expectation  value of  any observable  
quantity.  In  Chapter 2 you  learned  how  to  find  the  possible  outcomes

the  generalized  statistical  interpretation,  which  subsumes  all of  this and  enables you  to  
fip•ure  out  the  possible  results  of  run‘  measurement,  and  their  probabilities. Together  
with  the  Schriidinger  equation  (which  tells  you  how  the  wave  function evolves  in  time)  
it  is  the  foundation  of ouantuin  iiiechanics.
Generalized  statistical interpretation: lf yoii measure an observable  Q_ (z.    p) on  a  
particle  in  the  state  4 (.  , r),  you  aie  certain  to  get  one  oJ’ the  eiyenvnlues  of

ability of  p•ettinp•  the particular eigenvalue  q„  as.sociated  with  the orthonormalized 
eigenfiinction  /;, (.i)  is



ii   inc  spec ti um   is  coniinutius,   wiin   re‹ii  eipenv‹iiues  q (zj   ‹inu   ‹issoc i•iteu  
fiir‹ic- orthonorinalized  eip•enfnnctions   /,(.r),   the  probability  of  p•etting•  a  result   
in  the ranp•e  dz  is
|c(z)|'  d‹-    where    c'(z)  ==  ( /}| T).                               [3.a4j
Upon  measurement,  the  wave  function  “collapses”  to  the  corresponding  eip•en- state."
The statistical  interpretation is radically different  from anything  we encounter in classical  
physics.  A somewhat  different  perspective  helps  to  make  it  plausible: The eigenfunctions of 
 an  observable  operator  are  conif›lrte,  so the  wave  function can  tie written  as a iinear  
coint›ination  of  tnem:

[3.45]


In  the case  nf  continuous  spectra  the col lapse  is  to a  narrow  i nutr  ab‹iut  the  
measured  value,
dcpcnding  on  the  precision  of" the  iTic› sui ine  dcv ice.

Section 3.4:  Geiieralized  Statistical Interpretation        107

(For simplicity, I'll assume that the spectrum is discrete; it's easy to generalize this 
coefficients  are given  by  Fourier's  trick:'⁵
[3.46]

Qualitatively,  r„   tells  you  “how  much   /j,   is  contained   in  T,”    and  given  that  a 
measurement  has  to return  one  of  the  eigenvalues  of  O,  it  seems  reasonable  that the 
probability  of gettinp•  the particular  eip•envalue  q„  would  be determined  by  the “amount  
of  J,”    in  T.   But  because  probabilities  are  determined  by  the  absolute
square   of  the   wave  function,   the  precise   iiieasure   is  actually   |rq |2.  That's  the
essential  burden  of  the  generalized  .statistical  interpretation.'⁶
Of course,  the rate/  probability  (summed  over all  possible  outcomes) has got
•    n..  ......
[3.47]


and  sure enough,  this follows from  the  normalization  of  the  wave function:





[3.48]

Similarly, the expectation  value of  Q should  be the sum over all possible outcomes or  tne 
eigenvaiue  times  tne proDaDiiity  of  getting  mat eigenvalue:

[3.49]


Indeed,
[3.50]



'^Noticc  that  the  time  dependence—which  is  not  at  issue  here—is  carried  by  the  
cnet-hcients;
to  make  this explicit.  wc shculd  really  write ‹'„ (r).
' 6 Again.  I  am  scrupulously  a›'oidfng  the  all-too-common  assertion  “|•»I‘  is the  
probability   that the  particle  is  in  the  state  J},.” This  is  nonsense.  The  particle  is  
in  the  state  T.   perind.  Rather,  |•’› 12 is the  probability   that  a  niensiiienieiif  tif  
Q   would  yield  the  value  r/„.  lt  is  true  that  such  a  measurement
will  collapse  the state  to  the eigenfunctic›n  /t.   so one could  correctly  say  “|c-,t |-   
is  the  probability  that a  particle  which  is no›r  in  the  state  W  wit/  lie  in  the  
state   /„  subsequent  to  a  measurement  of  Q”   . ,  , but  that's  a completely  dift'ercnt  
assertion.










ii'iiii»

Can  we  reproduce,  in  this  lanp•iiap•e.  the  original  statistical  interpretation  for 
position  measurements?  Sure—it's  real  overkill,  but  worth  checking.  A  measure-

position  operator.  Well,  in Example 3.3  we found  that  evei y  (real) number  y  is an
eigenvalue  of  .t,  and  the  correspondinp• (Dirac-orthonorinalized)  eigenfunction  is
,q; (.r) =   8(x —  y).  Evidently



so  the  probability   of  getting  a  result  in  the  rang•e  dy  is    4 i v, t)  2 dv,   which  
is precisely  the  original  statistical  interpretation.
What  about  inoiiientum‘?  In Example  3.2 we  fotind  that  the  eigenfunctions of
the  momentum  operator  are   J",(.  ) =    ( 1/    2      ) exp(U›.  /f:),  so

[3.53]

This is such an  important  quantity  that  we give  it a speclal  name and  symbol:  the

of  the  fuosition  space)  wave  function  T (x, r) —which.  by  Plancherel's  theorem. is its 
im›ei se  Fourier  transform:




2nf:
According  to  the  p•enera1ized  statistic‹i1  interpretation.  the  probability  that  a  mea- 
surement  of  iiiomentuiii  would  yield  ‹i  result  in  the range cl;›  is

[3.56


Example 3.4     A  particle  of  iliass  iii  is  bound  in  the  delta  function  well   V(   )  =
—né(.  ). What  is the probability  that  a measurement  of its momentum  would  yield a value  
greater  than  ;Jn —— ma/ti"!

Section 3. 4:  Generalized  Statisticcil  Interpretation         109
Solution:  The  (position  space)  wave function is (Equation  2.129)



ct


-i   Ei  fit
e
e  ''    'he    '   I'  ““”dx


(I looked  up the integral). The probability,  then, is






(again,  I looked  up  the integral).

+  tan— i      P )
0




the p•round  state of the harmonic  oscillator.  What  is the probability  (to 2 significant 
digits)  that  a  measurement   of  p  on  a  particle  in  this  state  would  yield  a  value 
outside   the  classical  range  (for  the  same  energy) ?  £fffii:  Look  in  a  math  table
rindr•r  “Nnrmn1   Eli ctri hiitsnn”   nr  “F.rmr  Fiinotinn”   fnr  the  niimerionl   part—nr  i 
rue
Mathematica.

em     ow  t  at

& dp.                                 [3.57]

otice    at x exp i px                          p) exp(i px
In  momentum  space, then,  the position  operator is  tit 8/ 8p. More generally,


W'       x, —      )   T  Qtr.       in  position  space;

&‘         ——       , p    & ‹:lp,      in momentum  space.
i  hp

[3.58]

In  principle  you  can  do  all  calculations  in  momentum  space  just  as  well  (though
not always as easily) as in position  space.

110          Chapter  3     form.alism.

3.5  THE UNCERTAINTY  PRINCIPLE
I  stated  the  uncertainty  principle  (in  the  form  ozcrp  >   h  2),  back  in  Section  1.6, 
and  you have checked it several times, in the problems.  But  we have never actually proved   it.  
In  this  section  I  will  prove  a  more  general  version  of  the  uncertainty principle,   and 
 explore  some  of  its  implications.   The  argument   is  beautiful,   but rather  abstract,  so 
 watch  closely.

3.5.1  Proof  of  the Generalized Uncertainty  Principle
For any  observable   A,  we  have (Equation  3.21):


where   f        (A  —    A))4.   Likewise,  for any  other  observable,  B,

oB         {g|,q),      where  g       (B  —   B))V.



•; •4 — ! f I f)!ele)  x  I! f led 1“
Now, for any  complex  number  z,

=  [Re(‹)]' + [Inn(z)]“  > [Inn(z)]'  =

[3.59]



[3.60]



[3.61]

But

\ f |p) — \(A    — \ A))U |(B  — \B))U)     (T|(A — \A))(B  — \B))U)
— \U |(AB  —  A\B)   —  B\ A) + \A) \B))U)
-   \U | ABU)  — \B)   \U | AT)   — {A){U | BE)  -     A)\B) \U |U)
—— ! AB) — \B)   \A)    — \A)   \B)   +  !A)|B)




Similarly,


\g| f) —— \B A) — \A)\B),



Section 3.5:  The Uticertaint y Priit6ip/e        111
(f   g) —   g  f)   ——  (AB) —    B A)  ——     A,    B]),
where


is    e co      u a or o     e  wo opera ors       ua  on              on     s o


\  A. B)))                                [3.62]

This  is  the  (generalized)  uncertainty  principle.  You  might  think  the  i  makes  it 
trivial—isn't  the  right  side  negative 1  No,  for  the  commutator  of  two  hermitian

As  an  example.  suppose  the  first  observable  is  position  (A  ——  x1,  and  the second  is 
momentum (B     (ñ/t )d cdx). We worked  out  their commutator  back in Chapter 2 (Equation  2.51):

.i.  p] —— ih.









[3.63]


one application  of  a much  more  general  theorem.
There is, in fact, an “uncertainty  principle” for every pair of observable.s whose operators âo 
Sof cOmiaitre—we call them incompatible observables. Incompatible observables  do not  have shared  
eip•enfunctions—at least,  they cannot  have a rom- plete  set  of  common  eigenfunctions  (see  
Problem  3.15).  By  contrast,  compatible (commuting)  observables ‹to admit complete sets of 
simultaneous eigenfunctions."

17
and itx expectation  value is imaginary  (Problem  3.26).
"i“his corresponds  to the fact  that  noncommuting  matrices cannot  be simultaneously 
diagonalized (that  is,  they  cannot  both  be  brought  to diagonal  form  by  the  same  
similarity  transformation),  whereas commuting  hermitian  matrices  court   be  silnultaneously  
diagonalized.  See Section  A.S.





For  example,  in  the  hydrogen  atoln  (as  we  shall  see  in  Chapter 4)  the  Hamilto- nian,  
the  mag•nitude  of  the  angular  momentum,  and  the  z  component  of  angular

ous eigenfunctions of all three, labeled  by their respective eigenvalues. But there is
ito  eigenfunction  of  position  that  ls also an eip•Cnfunction of  momentum,  because

Note  that  the  uncertainty  principle  is  not  an  exh-u  assumptlon  in  quantum theory, but 
rather a coitsequence  of the statistical  lnterpretation. You  might  wonder ow       sen    or    
           e   a  or   ory             can     yoi    ee      ne   say     o        e

of  the particle,  but  the act of measurement  collapses  the wave function  to a narrow spike,  
which  necessarily  carries  a  broad  range  of  wavelengths  (hence  momenta)

collapse  to  a  long•  slnusoidal  wave,  with  (now)  a  well-defined  wavelenp•th—but the  
particle  no  longer  has  the  position  you  got  in  the  first  measurement.'⁹  The

measurement obsolete. Only if the wave function were simultaneously an eigenstate of  both 
observables  would  it  be possible  to make the second  measurement  without st  r   ng    e s     
 o     e pa   c e   t  e   econ   co  apse wou   n    c  an  e any    ng
in  that  case).  But  this  is  only  possible,  in  general,  if  the  two  observables  are 
compatible.

+Problem 3.13
a       ro  e     e   o  ow  ng  co    nu a or    en    y
AB. C]      A  B. C] +   A. C] B.                          [3.64j

(b)   Show  that

(c)   Show  more  p•enerally  that

3.65




“Niels  Bohr  was  at  pains  to  track  down  the  nice/iriiii,ini  by  which  the  measurement  
of  -r  (for instance) destroys  the previously  existing  value of  y. The ci ux of the matter  is 
that  in order to determine the position  of a particle  you  have  to poke  it  with  something 
—shine  light  on  it. say.  But  these  photons impart  to  the  panicle  a  momentum  you  cannot 
 control.  You  now  know  the  position.  but  you  no  longer know  the  momentum.  His  famous  
debates  svith  Einstein  include  many  dclip•litful  examples.  showinp• in  detail  how  
experimental  constraints  enforce  the  uncertainty  principle.  For  an  inspired  account  sec

Buhr's  article   in   A Ilur rt   Ein str.i-ii
( 1949).
Ph iI i simmer- Sr intlti ‹I    cd1tt2(I   bV   P    A   fichilnn    Tudnr    New   York

Section 3.5:  The Uncertaitit)  Principle         113


+Problem 3.14  Prove the famous  “(your name)  uncertainty  principle,”  relating  the uncertainty  
in  position  (A  —— .v) to the  uncertainty  in energy  (B      p'-/2iti  +  V):

2iii
For stationary  states this doesn't  tell  you  much—why  not?

Problem  3.15  Show that two noncoinmutinq• operators cannot  have a complete set of  common  
eig•enfunctlons.  ffiiir.  Show  that  if  P  and  Q  have  a  coiliplete  set  of common  
eigenfunctions, then  f^.   ul  /  =  U for any function  in  Hilbert  space.

3.5.2  The Minimum-Uncertainty Wave Packet
We   have   twice   encountered   wave   functions   that   his   the   nosition-momentum 
uncertainty   menit                       /:/2):   the   ground   state   of   the   harmonic   
oscillator (Problem  2.1 l)  and  the Gaussian  wave packet  for the free particle (Problem  2.22). 
This  rai.ses  an interesting  question:  What  is  the win.rr  geiiei al  minimum-uncertainty wave 
packet?  Looking  back  at  the proof  of  the  uncertalnty  princlple,  we  note  thai there  were 
two points at  whlch  inequalities came  lnto the argument: Equation  3.59 and  Equation  .3.60.  
Suppose  we  require  that  each  of  these  be  an  ecjtinlits  ,  and  see what  this  tells  us 
about  T.
The  Schwarz  inequality  becomes  an  equality  when  one  function  is  a  multi- ple  of  the  
other:  ,g(.v)  =   c/(.r),  for  some  complex  number  c'  (see  Problem  A.5). Meanwhile,  in  
Equation  3.b0  I  threw  away  the  real  part  of  z;  equality  results  if Re(.) =  0, which is 
to say, if Re(f |g) — Re(c   f   f)) =  0. Now, ()’| f)  is certainly real,  so  this  means  the  
constant  c must  be  purely  imaginary—let's call  it  in.   The


For the position-momentum  uncertainty  principle  this critei‘ion  becoiiies:

[1.67]
^   f
which  is  a  differential  equation  for  T   as  a  function  of  .v.  Its  general  solution 
(Problem  3.16)  is
T(.   )      Ae"“"'—( )!"'he'(  !'  ”.                               [1.68]
Evidently  the minimum-uncertainty wave packet is a gaussian —and the two exam- ples we encountered 
 earlier ii ei e gaussians.-⁰

'   Note  th.it  it  is only  the dependence  ol’ '1'  on .r  that  is at  issue  here—the  
“con.stands”  .4. ‹i.  (.i‘).
.tnd  (p)  may  all  be  functions  of  time.  and  for  that  matter  T   may  evolve  aw‹ty  
l'roni  the  minimal  form. All I'm asserting  is  that  if. at  some  instant.  the  wave  
function  is gaussian  in .r. then (at  that  instant)  the uncertainty  product  is  minimal.

114          Chapter 3    hornlalisni


Problem  3.16  Solve Equation  3.67  for  T(.r). Note  that  (x) and    p)  are constants.




The position-momentum  uncertainty  principle  is often  written  in  the form

[3.69]

A.r (the "uncertainty" in .i) is loose notation (and sloppy language) for the standard deviation of 
the results of repeated measurements on identically  prepared systems.-'


[3.70]

Indeed,  in  the context  of  special  relativity  the energy-time  form  mip•ht  be thought

rather,  ct)  g•o  top•ether  in  the  position-time  four-vector,  while  p  and  E  (or rather, E 
fc)  q•o  together  in  the energy-momentum fotir-vecior.  So  in a  relati   istic  theory 
Equation  3.70  would  be  a  necessary  concomitant  to Equation  3.69.  But  we're  not doing  
relativistic  qriantuni  mechanics.  The  Schri›ding•er  equation  is explicitly  non- 
relativistic:  It  treats  r  and  x  on  a  very  unequal  footing  (as  a differential  equation 
it  is §rsi-order  in  r,  but  second-order  in a ),  and  Equation  3.70 is emphatically  our 
imnlied  by Equatirin  3.69. My purpose now is tri  derii›e  the energy-time uncertainty principle, 
 and  in  the  course  of  that  derivation  to  persuade  you  that  it  is  really  an altogether 
different  beast, whose superficial resemblance  to the position-momentum unceHainty  principle  is 
 actually  quite  misleading.
After  all,  position,   momentum,   and  energy   are  all  dynamical   variables— measurable  
characteristics  of  the  system,  at  any  given  time.  But   time  itself  is

p•o out and  measure the "time" of a particle, as you  mip•ht its position or its energy. Time  is  
the  iiiclepeiident   variable,  of  which  the  dynamical  quantities  are   i‹iic’- tioits.  In  
particular,  the  Ar   in  the  energ•y-time  uncertainty   principle  is  not  the standard  
deviation  of  a  collection  of  time  measurements;  roughly  speaking  (I'll make  this  more  
precise  in  a  moment)  it  is  the  time it takes the s)!stem  to change sul›struiti ill\ .

I xi)
a completely  dil‘ferenl—and S‹›inetinie.s  9Uite un|ustihed—measure of "uncertainty." Cnnvei sc1y. 
some pcr1”cctly  rigorous  ai-guinents  use  ether  dchniticns  oI” "uncertainty." See  Jan  
Hilgevcord.  Aim. J. F/It's. 70, 983 (2002).

Section 3.S:  The Uncertain I)› Pt iticiple         115

As  a  measure  of  how  fast  the  system  is  chanp•ing,  let  us  compute  the  time derivative  
of  the expectation  value of  some observable,  Q_ (.r.  p. i):

di             dt
Now, the Schrodinger  equation  says




(where  H  —— p'-/2in  +  U  is the Hamiltonian).  So

ᵈ ‹of  = —.ˡ

ap“






d               i      -    -
Q) —  — ([H, Q]) +
!i

[3.71]

This  is  an  interesting  and  useful  result  in  its  own  right  (see  Pi'obleins  3.17  and 
3.31). In the typical case where the operator does  not depend explicitly  on time,
it  tells  us  that  the  rate  of  change  of  the  expectation  value  is  determined  by  the 
commritator  of  the  operator  with  the  Hamiltonian.  In  particular,  if  Q  coniini,ite.s with 
 N, then  ( Q)  is constant. and  in this sense  i2  is a coarser  red  quantity.

principle (Equation  3.62),  and  assume  that  Q  does  not  depend explicitly  on  r:
i  !• •!l0)   '       ^   '    dlg)   *
"       2i       dl        "       2           dt

Or  more sim


Let's  define  A f'             and

‘I’‘’         2      dt


|d| Q)/‹It |”





[3.73]

--Operalnrs  that  depend  explicitl}'  un  /  ale  quite  iarc.  sn  nliiiosi  nlii'aj s   rl     
Lili   ——  0.  As  an example  cf P.. plicii   time  dependence.  consider  the  putcnti‹i1  energy 
 ot  a  IiarmcMic  cscillatci  whose spring constant  is ch:inging  (perh.‹p.s  the  tempei'ature  
is riring, .st›  the  .string  hccon\es  ni‹›rc  t\cxihlc): Q -   (] /2) n  w(/)]-.‹'.




Then
[3.74]

and  that's  the energy-time  uncertainty  principle.  But  notice  what  is meant  by  it,
here: Since


Ar  represents  the  muoxur  of  time  it  tcikes  the  e.xJ1ectntion  vnlue  of  Q  to change  b)› 
one  standard  deviation.-3  In  particular,   Ar  depends  entirely  on  what  observable (Q_)  
you  care  to  look  at—the  change  might  be rapid  for one  observable  and  slow for another.  
But  if  AE  is small,  then  the rate of change  of ‹tJf  observables must be
very  gradual   nr   tn  put  it  the nther  way  arntind   if  tiny  nhservahle  changes  rapidly
the “uncertainty”  in  the energy  must  be large.


Ar  =   no)—as  in  fact  we  noticed  some  time  ago  (see  Equation  2.9).  To  make something  
happen  you  must  take  a  linear  combination  of  at  least  two  stationary







COS
£z —  E
h
The neriod of oscillation is r  =  2s h/(E› — E  ). Roughly speaking,  AE      E› — E
and  Ar  =  i  (for  the e.rsrr  calculation  see Problem 3.18), so


which  is indeed  >0/2.

Example 3.6    How lonp• does it take a free-particle wave packet to pass by a partic-

Ar  =   A.v/r       inix/   p,  but  E       p'-/2iit,  so  A £  =   pAp/m. Therefore,


which  is >/i/2  by  the  position-momentum uncertainty  principle.



principle.  For a  review  ol’ iilternative  approaches  sec  Paul’Busch,  FounJ.  Pli5!s.  20.  1  
(1990).












FIGURE 3.1:    A free particle  wave packet approaches  the point  A  (Example 3.6).



a    pe                            p      ce     ass   a  o                   secon   s     e ore  
spon      eousy disintegrating.  If  you  make  a  histogram  of  all  measurements  of  its  mass, 
 you  get a  kind  of  bell-shaped  curve  centered  at  1232  MeV/c  ,  with  a  width  of  about  
120 MeV/c-  (Figure  3.2).  Why  does  the  rest  energy  (ric  ) sometimes  come  out  higher


kE  Ar —    120  MeV) (10  23 sec) =  6  x  102   MeV  sec,

whereas  /:/2 =  3 x 10  2- MeV  sec. So  the  spread  in  in  is about  as small  as  the 
uncertainty  principle  allows—a  particle  with so short a lifetime  just doesn't  hnve
















1100               1200               1300
MASS (MeV/c2)

1400




Actually,  Example  3.7 is a bit of a fraud.  You can’t  measure  10*‘"  sec on  a stop-watch,  and 
in practice  the  lifetime  of’ such  a short-lived  particle  is  in{ermd  from  the  width  of  
the  mass plot,  using  the uncertainty  principle  as  import.  However.  the  point  is  valid.  
even  if  the  logic  is  backwards.  Moreover. if  you  assume  the  A   is  about  the  same  
size  Its  a  proton  (    10* '     m),  then  10   -"   sec  is  roughly  the time  it  takes  
light  to cross  the  particle.  and  it’s  hard  to  imagine  that  the  lifctime  could  be  much 
 less thaw  that.



Notice  the  variety  of  specific  meaninp•s  attaching  to  the  term  Ar  in  these examples: In 
Example  3.5 it's a period of oscillation: in Example 3.6 it's the time

particle. In every case, however,  Ar  is the time it  takes for the system  to undergo 
“substantial”  change.

conserved  in  quantum  mechanics—that  you're  allowed  to “borrow”  energy  k E, as long  as  you 
 “pay  it  back” in  a time  Ar  m li  (2k E)’, the greater  the  violation, the  briefer  the  
period  over  which  it  can  occur.  Now,  there  are  many  leg•itimate

Nowhere  does  quantum  mechanics  license  violation  of  enerp•y  conservation,  and certainly no 
such authorization  entered into ihe derivation of Equation  3.74. But the uncertainty  principle  
is extraordinarily  robust:  It  can  be misused  without  leading to  seriously  incorrect  
results,  and  as  a consequence  physicists  are  in  the habit  of applying  it rather 
carelessly.





one

(b)  Q_  =    N;  (c)  Q_   =   .  ;  (d)  Q_   =    p.  In  each  case,  comment  on  the  result, 
with particular reference  to Equations  1.27, 1.33, 1.38, and conservation of energy
o   n en s  o  o    ng    q  a

Prnhlem  3 1 B  Test  the enerry-time  uncertainty  r"••'r • for  the  wave  function  in
Problem 2.5  and  the observable  .i,  by  calculating  wp,    „   and d(.v   /dt  exactly.

Problem 3.19  Test the energy-time  uncertainty  principle for the free particle wave exactly.
o   e                 ow          e ei ergy      e   ncer ain y prin   p e re     es  o    e   yo  
r


3.6  DIRAC NOTATION
Imap•ine  an  ordinary  vector A in  two dimensions  (Fip•ure  3.3(a)). How  would  you describe  
this  vector  to  someone?  The  most  convenient  way  is  to  set  up  carte-

(Figure  3.3(b)).  Of  course,  your  sister  might  have  drawn  a  different  set  of  axes,
.i’  and  y',  and  she  would  report  different  coiriponents:   At       i-’    A.  A’s.       
j’  -  A
(Figure  3.3(c)),   But   it's  all   the   same  vector —we're   simply   expressing   it  with 
respect  to two different  hases  ((i , y}  and (i',  ;’)). The  vector  itself  lives “out  there 
in  space,” independent  of  anybody's  (arbitrary)  choice  of coordinates.
















(a)                                                         (b)
(e›


(c) Components  of  A  with respect  to x'y' axes.

The  same  is  true  for  the  state  of  a  system  in  quantum  mechanics.  It  is  rep- resented 
 by  a  i›ectoi  ,  |4(r)),  that  lives  “out  there  in  Hilbert  space,”  brit  we  can e  p ess 
 itw      respec   toai  ynu      ero         erent        es       e    a  e     nc   oi

functions:
[3.75]
(with  |.i )  standing  for  the  eigenfunction  of  .i‘  with  eigenvalue  .r),'5  whereas  the 
momentum   space  wavefunction   4›(Ja. r)  is  the  expansion  of  |ñ)  in  the  basis  of 
momentum  eigenfunctions:

[3.76j

(with    J›)  standing  for  the  eigenfunction  of      with  eigenvalue  p)."  Or  we  could 
expand  |ñ)  in  the  basis of energy  eip•enfunctions (supposinp•  foi  simplicity  that  the

3.77

same  state;  the functions  T  and  &, and  the collection  of coefficients  (c„}, contailâ
exactly  the saine information—they  are simply  three different  ways of  describinp•
e same  vec


T(.r, t)  ——         ( ’.   I)6(.v  —  ')  tl v          4›(y. t)
2
e'’"“’“"  d p




'"1   demi’t  want  to  call  it  ,y ,   I Equation  .3.39).  because  th‹tt  is  its  l‘orni  in  
the  positiiiii  has is.  mid
tI e  wl ‹›Ie  pnint  hcre  is t0  lree  uui”sclvcs  fi um  an}  [›:\rticuIal   hasis.  Indeed.    
’lien !  ñrst  dcI1i1cJ  Hilhci t

own
s    c    as  t  c      t  o       ua  c  in c•  a         unc
ve               at                      y          r                                  t
us  to a specific  1 cprescnlatioii  bthe  position  basis›.  1  w‹int  now  to  think o1’ it  ‹is  
art  ill.htinct  vector .sp‹icc. u‹hose  members  can  be expressed  truth  re.spcct  lo any  basls 
 you  like.
-"In  posil ion  space  it  woultl  be  //, I.r)  I Equation  3.32 ),

120           C/  z/pter 3    Foriii‹ilism

Operators  (representing  observables)  are linear transformations—they “trans- form” one vector 
into another:
|§)         |   ).                                              [3.79]
Just  as  vectors  are  represented,  with  respect  to a  particular  basis     egg)   ,-⁷ by  
their components,


operators  are  repi'esented  (with  respect  to  a  particular  basis)  by  their  matrix  ele-
ments-'


In  this notation  Equation  3.79  takes  the fonn


ur, taking  the  inner  product  with   edit),


and  hence
[3.81]


[3.82]


[3.53)


[3.84]

Thus  the  matrix  elements  tc11  you  how  the  componcnts  transform.
Later  on  we  will  encounter  sy.sterns  that  admit  only  a  finite  number  (N)  of linearly  
independent   states.  In  that  case  |4(r))  lives  in  an  N-dimensional   vector

given  basis),  and  operators  take  the  form  of  ordinmy  (N  x  N)  matrices.  These are the 
simplest quantum systems—none of  the subtleties associated  with infinite- dimensional  vector  
spaces  arise.  Easiest  of  all  is  the  two-state  system,  which  we explore in  the following 
example.

Example 3.8    Imap•ine  a system  in  which  there  are just  nl'o  linearly  independent states$9

and    |2)  =


71’11asxuinc  the  basis  is  discrete:  otherwise  it   becomes  a  continuous  index   and  the  
sums  arc

*“Tl1i»  tel n1in‹›l(›g}’  is  inspired.  ohvicuslY.  hy  the  linile-dimensional  case.  but  Use  
"matrix"  will
»ow  rypicnlly  leave  zin  inlinitc  (nlayhc  cvcn  uncnuntahlc)  numher  nl  elements.
—"Technic:tlly.  the  “ccJuals”  sign.s  here  mean  ”is  represented  by."  but  I don’t  thinli 
:iny  conl‘usion will  arise  if‘ we  itdopt  the  customary  inform.tl  notation.

Section  3. 6.-  Dirac Nof«ffOff            121
The  most  general  state is a normalized  linear  combination:

|4) =1o|1)
6|2)         J)          with |o|2 -1- |b|2       1

The  Hamiltonian  can  be  expressed   as  a  (hermitian)  matrix;  suppose  it  has  the pe





Solution:  The (time-dependent) Schriiding•er  equation  says

dt
As always,  we begin  by solving  the time-independent Schriidinger  equation:
H |   )      E | s);                                                   [3.86J
that  is,  we  look  for  the  eigenvectors   and  eigenvalues  of  H.   The  characteristic 
equation  determines  the eigenvalues:

det    '   —  E         g
g         h  —  E

=  (ft  —  E)“  —  g        0 M  li  —  E   ——  y  g        E     —— ft       g.
Evidently  the  allowed  energies  are  (/i  -1-  ,q)  and  (/i  — g).  To determine  the  eigen- 
vectors,  we  write


so the  normalized  eigenvectors  are



Next  we  expand  the  initial  state  as  a  linear  combination  of  eigenvectors  of  the 
Hamiltonian:

|8(0))
i         i
—   0   "     2 “     ) ”   '*—))
Finally,  we  tack on  the standard  time-dependence exp(—i E, t/h):











—i sin(gr //t)
If  you  doubt  this  result,  by  all  means  check  it:  Does  it  satisfy  the  time-dependent
Schriidinger  equation?  Does  it  match  the  initial  state  when  r =   0?
This  is  a  crude  model   for  (among   other  things)  neutrino  oscillations.  In that  case  
|1)  represents   the  electron  neutrino,  and  |2)  the  muon  neutrino;  if  the Hamiltonian  
has  a  nonvanishing   off-diagonal  term  (g)  then  in  the  course  of  time the electron  
neutrino  will  turn  into  a muon  neutrino  (and  back  again).

Dirac  proposed  to chop  the bracket  notation  for  the  inner  product,  (n|Q), into

the  r).  The latter  is  a  vector,  but  what  exactly  is  the former? It's a linenr function of 
 vectors,  in the sense  that  when  it  hits  a vector (to  its right) it  yields a (complex) 
number—the  inner  product.  (When  an  opeintor  hits  a  vector,  it  delivers  another

can  be  thought  of  as  an  instruction  to integrate:




with the ellipsis [ - -   ) waiting  to be filled by whatever function the bra encounters in
the ket to its right. In a finite-dimensional vector space, with the vectors expressed as co

<2
[3.87]



the corresponding  bra is a row  vector:

«  =  («l          .  o*) .                                    [3.88]

The  collection  of  all  bras  constitutes  another  vector  space—the  so-called  dual

The  license  to  treat  bras  as  separate  entities  in  their  own  right  allows  for some  
powerful  and pretty  notation  (though  I shall  not exploit it in  this  book). For example,  if  
|a)   is a normalized  vector,  the operator

[3.89]

Section 3.6:  Dirac Noiaiioii          123
picks out  the portion  of  any  other  vector  that  “lies  along•”  |m):
we call it the projection  operator onto the one-dimensional subspace spanned  by
[3.90]
then
[3.91]
(the identity  operator).  For if we let  this operator  act on any  vector |a), we recover ansion  
of                                 basis
13.92]
Similarly,  if    e-) j is a  Dii‘ric  orthonormalized continuous  basis,
[3.93)

then
[3.94)

Equations  3.91 and  3.94 are the tidiest  ways  to express completeness.


Problem 3.21  Show that projection operators are idempotent:  P²      P. Determine
the eigenvalues  of  P,  and characterize  its eigenvectors.

Problem 3.22  Consider a three-dimensional vector space spanned  by an onhonor- ma1 basis  |1), 
|2), |3). Kets |a)  and  |$)  are p•iven  by


(a)   Construct  (a|  and  (Q | (in  terms  of  the  dual  basis  (1|,  (2|,  (3|),
(b)   Find  (m |Q)  and  (Q |n), and  confirin  that  (Q |a) =  {a|Q)*.
in         nine  matrix  elements  o      e operator                    ,  in  t         asis,  an

124           Chapter 3    Forni‹ilisin


Problem 3.23  The Hamiltonian  foi  a certain  two-level  system is
H  —    (|1)(1|  — |2)(2| -I- | ))(2| -I- |2)(1|) ,

where  I I ), |2)  is  an  orthononnal  basis  and  e  is  a  number  with  the  dimensions  of 
energy.  Find  its  eigenvalues  and  eigen  ectors  (as  linear  combinations  of  | 1)  and
|2)).  What  is  the  matrix  H representing        with  respect  to  this  basis?


tors:





Hint:   An  operator  is  characterized  by  its  action  on  all  possible  vectors,  so  what you 
 must  show  is  that

â!a) —    j[],«i›• i‹’›•)(e•• i   !•).

for any  vector  |a).


FURTHER PROBLEMS FOR CHAPTER  3
Problem 3.25  Legendre  polynomials.  Use  the  Gram-Schmidt  procedure  (Prob- lem A.4)  to 
orthonormalize the functions  1,  .  ,  .r-, and  x  , on  the interval  —1  <
.r  < 1.  You  may  recognize  the  results—they  are (apart  from the  normalization) 0

Problem 3.26  An anti-hermitian (or skew-hermitian) operator is equal to itiinus
its hermitian  conjugate:
JT      —                                                    [3.95]
(a)   Show  that  the expectation  value of  an anti-hermitian operator  is imaginary.
(b)   Show  that  the commutatoi‘  of  two heriiiitian  operators  is anti-hermitian. How about  
the  commutator  of  two hurt-hermitian  operators?


“”1.egendrc  didn”I  knnw  wh•lt  the  hest  cnnventinn  wnulrt  be: lie Sickert  the  nvei'all  
fa«tor  sn  thaf all  his  I”unctions  would  9o  to  I  at .t  =   I .  .ind  we’re  stu«k  with  
this  ui  forlunatc  choice.




Problem  3.27  Sequential   measurements.   An  operator   A,  representing   observ- able   A,   
has  two  normalized  eigenstates         and  J„     with  eigenvalues  ci   and  u„ respectively. 
 Operator  B,   representinp•  obsei'vab1e   B,   has  two  normalized  eip•en- states Q;  and  Q2, 
 with eigenvalues   fu  and  b2.  The  eigenstates  are  related  by
Hi  =  (3Q   +  4Q,)/5,     J,   =  (4Q   — 3Q,)/5.
(a)   Observable  A is measured,  and  the value a;  is obtained. What is the state of the  system  
(immediately)  after  this measurement?
(b)   If   B  is  now  measured,  what  are  the  possible  results,  and  what  are  their

(c)   Right  after  the  measurement  of  B,   A  is measured  a•ain.  What  is  the  pi oba- 
hiTilv  nd yettiny  ri t *   (Nnte  that   the  an*wer  wnitirl  he  qMite  rliffe  ent  if  1  
hari told  you  the outcome of  the  B  measurement.)

+Problem  3.28  Find  the  momentum-space  wave  function  & ,(p. t)  for  the  Cth  sta- tionai y  
state  of   the   infinite   square   well.  Graph    B   (p,  t)  -   and  |&,(y›, i)|-,   as 
functions  of  ;› (pay  particular  attention  to  the  points  p          nu It/‹’i). Use  &„  p. 
t) to calculate  the expectation  value  of  y-.   Compare  your  answer  to Problem  2.4.

Problem  3.29  Consider  the  wave  function




where ii is some positive intep•er. This function is purely  sinusoidal (with wavelength Z)  on  
the  interval  —ii X  <   .    <   nL.   but  it  still  carries  a  icon ge  of  moiiienta,  
because the  oscillations  do  not  continue  out  to  infinity.  Find  the  momentum  space  wave
function   4›(p, 0).  Sketch  the  p•raphs  of  | W(.i. 0)|*  and  |4›(J›, 0)|2,  and  deteriiiine
their  widths,  in,   and  mp  (the  distance  between  zeros  on  eithei’  side  of  the  main 
peak).  Note  what  happens  to each width as ii  —+  en. Usinp• it    and  in ,  as estilBates of  
A.r  and  AJ›, check  that  the uncertainty  principle  is satisfied.  Wait mirth:  If you  try 
ca1culatinp•  pg,  you’ie  in for‘ a rude  surprise.  Can  you  diagnose  the problem?


Problem  3.30  Suppose
T(x. 0) =       A
for constants  A and o.



(a)   Determine  A, by  normalizing  T(x. 0).
(b)   Find  (x),  (.  '),   and  ‹r.,  (at  time  i  — 0).
(c)   Find  the  momentum  space  wave  function  &(p. 0),  and  check  that  it  is nor- malized.
{d)  Vie    &(p, 0)  to calculate  (p),  (p  ), and    „  (at  time i =  0).
(e)   Check  the Heisenberp•  uncertainty  principle  for  this state.

+Problem  3.31   Virial  theorem.  Use Equation  .3.71  to  show  that


—{.  p)  — 2(T) —   .
rlr                                    ‹I.r
[3.961
where  T  is  the  kinetic  energy  (f/  =  T  +   Y). In  a  .tiririoiiaio   state  the  left  
side  is zero (why?)  so
2(T)        .                                                             [3.97]


states  of  the  harmonic  oscillator,  and  check  that  this  is  consistent  with  the  results 
you  g°ot  in Problems  2.11  and  2.12.

Problem 3.32  In  an  interesting  version  of  the enerp•y-tirne  uncertainty  principle  ¹ Ar  =  
  r/u,  where   T  is  the   time  it  takes  T (.r. f)  to  evolve  into  a  state  orthogo- nal  
to  W (x.   0).  Test   this  out,  using  a  wave  function  that  is  an  equal  admixture of  
two  (orthonormal)   stationary   states  of  some  (arbitrary)  potential:   T(.r, 0)  = (  /2)l1l 
(>) +  4i(  )1

+Problem  3.33  Find  the matrix elements  (x |.i |x’) and  (it  p it’)  in the (orthonormal) basis 
of  stationary  states  for  the  harmonic  oscillator  (Equation  2.67).  You  already calculated  
the  “diagonal”  elements  (x  =   ii')  in  Problem  2.12;  use  the  same  tech- nique for the 
general case. Construct  the corresponding• (infinite) matrices,  X  and P. Show  that  ( 1/2in)P- 
+  (ion›'/2)X‘  =  H is diagnna 1,  in  this basis.  Are  its diagonal elements  what  you  would  
expect'?  Par tial cmsivei.


(  I^ I'›’) =     y„t„ (>"'*.....’—i  +  V'**..’..›—i) -


'  ' Sec  Ley  Vaidman,  ztiii. 7.  Ph j-s. 60.  182  ( 1992)  lor  a proof’.
[3.98]

Fiirfher Problems  [or Chapter  3          127


Problem  3.34  A  harmonic  oscillator  is in  a  state  such  that  a measurement  of  the energy  
would  yield either  (1/2)fim  or  (1J2)hu›,  with equal probability.  What  is the largest  
possible  value  of  (p)  in  such  a  state?  If  it  assumes  this  maximal  value  at


+Problem 3.35  Coherent states of the harmonic oscillator.   Among  the stationary states of  the  
harmonic  oscillator  (|n)  =   J„  (x),  Equation  2.67)  only  n  =  0 hits  the unccrtainty   
limit  (cry-oj         /i /2):  in  general,  wgwq  =    (2ii  -1-  l)fi /2,  as  you  found in 
Problem  2.12. But  certain  ltnear combinations  (known  as coherent  states)  also minimize  the  
uncertainty  product.  They  are  (as  it  turns  out)  eigenfunctioy5 0.( the
lower iiig oyerafor •3*


(the  eigenvalue  a  can  be  any  complex  number).
(a)   Calculate   (z),  (z'),  (p),  (p2)  in  the  state  |o).  Hiiit:  \Jse  the  technique   in 
Example  2.5, and remember  that o+ is the  hermitian  conjugate  of o   . Do nor assume  a  is 
real.
(b)   Find  w,  and    g;  show  that     ,     , =  ft /2.
(c)   Like  any  other  wave  function.  a  coherent  state  can  be  expanded  in  terms  of 
energ•y  eig•enstates:



Show  that the expansion  coefficients  are


(d)   Determine  co by  normalizing  |a). An.s i›e r:  exp(—|a |-/2).
(e)   Now  put  in  the  time  dependence:
|/›)  —+  e   "       /h |n),
and show  that |a(r))  remains an eigenstate  of o   , but  the eigenvo/ife  evolves
in  time:


So a coherent state sta; s coherent, and continues  to minimize  the uncertainty
product.

"There  are  no  normalizable  eigenfunctions of  the  ruisiitg  operator.

128          Chapter 3    Torinalisin

(I)   Is  the  ground  state  (|ii  =   0)) itself  a coherent  state?  If  so,  what  is  the 
eigen- value?

Problem  3.36  Extended  uncertainty   principle.³³  The  generalized   uncertainty principle  
(Equation  3.62)  states  that

A                4 (C)2,
where  C      —i  A, B}.
(a)  Show  that it can  be streng•thened  to read

A     B        — ((C)- -j-   D)-),                                       [3.99]

where D      AB -J- BA —2(A) (B). Hiitt. Keep the Re(z) term in Equation  3.60.
(b)  Check  Equation  3.99 for the case  B  —  A (the standard  uncertainty  principle is  trivial, 
 in  this  case,  since  C  =  0,  unfortunately,  the  extended  uncertainty principle doesn't  
help much either).

Problem 3.37  The  Hamiltonian  for a certain  three-level  system  is represented  by

u     0    b
H=      0    c    0
6    0    «
where  ‹i,  6,  and  c  are  real  numbers  (assume  r  — c =/-  +   6).
(a)   If  the system  starts out  in the state

|4(0)) =

at is
(b)   If  the system  starts out  in  the state




what is |4(r))?


""For  interesting  commcntary  and  references,  see R.   R. Puri,  Ph ys. Rev.  A  49. 2178  
(1994).



£'urther T'robleins   f  r Cbapt‹r  3          129


the matrix
10        0
H=ñn›    0    2    0
0    0    2

Two other  observables,  A  and  B,   are  represented  by  the  matrices
010                                    200
A=X         1     0    0           B=p        0    0     1
0    0    2                           010
where  in, X, and  p  are  positive real  numbers.
(a)   Find  the  eigenvalues  and  (normalized)  eigenvectors  of  H,  A,  and  B.
(b)   Suppose  the  system  starts  out  in  the  p•eneric  state




with  |  11    +     ca_ -  +      3     ==  1.  Find  the expectation  values  (at  r  — 0) of  H,
A, and  B.
(c)   What  is   3(t))*  If  you  measured  the  energy  of  this  state  (at  time  r),  what 
values  might  you  get,  and  what  is the probability  of each?  Answer  the  same


Problem 3.39
(a)   For a  function   f(.x)  that  can  be  expanded  in  a Taylor  series,  show  that

1’(<  +  xo) —— e'“  ^"
(where .'o is any constant  distance). For this reason,     /h is called  the genera-
tor of translations  in space.  Note   The exponential of an ope rator  is defined
by  the  power  series  expansion:  e         1 +   p  -(1/2)    - -J- (1/3!)    ³ +  ....
(b)   If  T(x, i)  satisfies  the (time-dependent) Schriidinger  equation,  show  that


(where  rp is any constant  time); — H/li  is called  the generator of translations
in time.





(c)   Show  that  the  expectation  value  of  a  dynamical  variable  Q_ (x,    p,   r),  at  time
i + ie. can be  written"‘




se            o  iecover     qua ion order  in dr.
i,   an    expan            rs


le
(a)   Write  down  the  time-dependent  "Schriidinger  equation"  in  momentum  space,
for a free  particle,  and  solve  it.  Aitsii•ei .  exp(—i/J-r/2iii/i) &(p. 0).
(b)   Find   &(p, 0)  for  the  travelinp•  p•aussian   wave  packet  (Problem  2.43).  and 
construct   4›(p, I)  for  this  case.  Also  construct    &(p, i)|  ,  and  note  that  it  is in  
epen  en         ime.
(c)   Calculate  (p)  and  (¿i*)  by  evaluating•  the  appropriate  integrals  involving  4›,

(d)  Show that  (I-I)       (p)-/2in +   \I-t)p  (where  the  subscript  0 denotes  the sta- 
tionui)’  gaussian),  and comment on this result.









"*In  particular.  if" wc  set  r  =   (1.  and  dicp  thc  subscript  on  ray.

(Q())—(44iw|$|T(n))= '(.0|U  QU|T>.0))

wiching   p   between  T (.i‘. r)*  and  T (.r. r),  as  we  have  always  done  t letting  the  
wave  functions  carry
the  time  dependence),   or  vl.se   by  SitndWiCkin@   U    p'     U   hctwecn   T l.r. 0)*   and 
 T(.r. 0).  letting   the
operninr  carry  the tilnc dcpcndeMce.  The  £omlcr is called the Schriidineer  picture.  and thc 
l‹iltcr  the
BeiSenberg picture.






-. ..      .
..    .     .                  .
t*,jUH1Y 1  UIVt 1YlLk*klH1
THREE DIMENSIONS





The  generalization to three  dimensions  is straip•htforward. Schri›dinp•er’s equation says

[4.1]


the Hamiltonian  operatorl   If  is obtained  from  the classical  energy




by  the  standard  prescription  (applied  now  to  i‘  and  c, as well  as .r):



p, ^   i  ,..'    ^: ^  T ,..'      -      fi ».'
[4.2]


Wliei e confusion  might  otherwise cccur  I lia 'e  becn  putting°  “hats” on cperatul's.  to 
tlisting\iixli them  t”i om  the  cnrrespondin•  classical  obscrvables.  I  don”t   think  there  
will  be  much  occasion   l”ni ambiguity  in  this  chapter.  and  the  hats  get  to  be  
cumbersome.  so  1  him  going  to  leave  them  off‘  l'roiu now  on.

131

132          Chapter  4     Qtldtlttins  Mecl attics  in Tl  ree Dir iersio›is



[4.3]


for  short.  Thus

[4.4j


where



is  the Laplacian,  in cartesian  coordinates.
The  notential  enerev   V  and  the  wave  function  4   are  now  functions  of  r  = (.r. y. z)  
and  t. The probability  of  findinp•  the  particle  in  the  infinitesimal  voluiTle d'r        
d.v d v ‹lz  is |T(r, i)|- d- r,   and  the  normalization  condition  reads


L^•“J


with  the  integral  taken  over all  space.  If  the  potential  is independent  of  time,  there
will  be  a complete  set  of stationary  states,

w„(r. ,› =  /„(rJ‹•-”" '  .                                  [4.7]

where  the  spatial  wave  function „      satisfies  the  time-iiideyaeiideiir  Schriidinger
equation:

[4.8]


The  p«eneral  solution  to  the  (time-r/‹•pc•iir/eiii)  Schrfidinger  equation  is

[4.9]

Y\i I  I I I      I I I R      R  All     W tOl     I  I  fi      L   j t      VG     IGA     11I I 
HSE           t_J          HU           Ill    I I I OI        W   cl  V R       1 IJ  IU    I I 
All    9      •f•     A  t   W 3        11I      LV I
usual  way.  (If  the potential  admits  continuum  states,  then  the  sum in Equation  4.9 
becomes  an integral.)


Section 4.1:  Sci r6dinger  fuJation in Spherical  Coordiiiates          133


(a)   Work out all of the canonical commutation  relations for components of’ the



where  the  indice.s  stand  for  x,  y, or c, and  r,   =   x,  i ;  =   y, and  r- =  c.
(b)   Confirm  Ehrenfest's  theorem  for 3-dimensions:

dt
(Each  of  these,  of course,  stands  for tlii'ee  equations—one  for each coiTlpo- nen          i 
       irs   c  ec       a     q  a  on            s    a       n      ee     me     on
(c)   Forniulate  Heisenberp•'s  uncertainty  principle  in  three  diiiiensions.  Aitsv!ei .
[4.12]

but  there  is  no restriction  on, say, w›   ,   .





case  it  is  natural  to  adopt  spherical  coordinates,   (i-. 8, Q)  (see  Figure 4.1).  In 
spherical  coordinates  the Laplacian  takes the form-
,         l    r3            fi                 I         ‹3                 8                  l   
           8-
*  ›-" a›-       a›-       ›° s:ns aa          aa       r" nin' a    a#'
In spherical coordinates.  then, the time-independent Schrodinger  equation  reads





We  begin  by  looking  for  solutions  that  are  separable  into  products:



- 1 n   pl inciple.   this   can   be   tibtained    by   change   of’  v:iriablcs   l'roin   the   
cartCSi.tfl   U Xprcssion
ua      i                    c  c          re  ai     Hue    M    c c    c   n        ys o     c    
n             e    o     i       c              o M‹yli‹uuiti‹‹il  ñf‹•r/rod.s   iii   t/ie   Ph5 
sic'nl   Scieiic‹•. .   2nd   cd..  (Wiley.   New   York.   1')83),   Chapter  10. Section  9.
























FIGURE 4.1:    Spherical  coordinates:  radius  r,  polar angle 8,  arid azimuthal  angle Q.

Putting  this  into Equation  4. 14,  we  have

It—      Y   d          ‹lR                R        b               6Y                 R       6-Y
2ni     i -’  cli            ‹li             r*sin8  ñ8               ‘b8             -’-5m'$  d
+ VRY ——  E RY.





+  —       .      —    sin 8 ,        -F       ,          ,     =  0.
Y       Sl11 i9  8&                d&            sin‘ 8  3&-

l'he  term  in  the  fii'st  curly  bi'acket  depends  only  on  r,   whereas  the  remainder

will appear in due couise.   I will write this “separation constant” in the forln 1(1-  I):



)          »'
bY                1      b-  Y
as    + Hi› 's   a#"    ⁼—/⁽/⁺¹⁾
(4.IG]

[4. l7]

“Note  th:t  theie  is  nc  loss  of”  genei aliry  here —ut  this  stagc  /  cuuld  be  a»y  
complex  number. I  awi   ni›  we"II  rlisrnvrr  ilial  /  i›ziisi   in  I“a‹ I  h«  :iiz  
ii//rrr•i    :inrI  ii   is  in  anlicinai inn  nt  lhal  resulf   I h II  I cxpi ess  tlic•  
separation  constant  in  a  way  that  louks  {?CCUtiitI“  nWW.


Section 4.1:  Schr’odiiiger  E qi.ration in Spherical  Coordiii ties         135


+Prob1em  4.2    Use  separation   of   variables   in  rnrrC•Sffiii   coordinates   to  solve   
the infinite  c’ifbfC‹i/  well  (or “particle  in  a  box”):
0,       if .v. y. z  are all  between  0 and  r:
en,    otherwise.
(a)   Find  the  stationary  states,  and  the corresponding  energies.
(b)   Call  the  distinct   energies   E   . E;.  E;,   , ..    .  in  order  of  increasing  
energy.
Find  €  . £,.  E  ,   4. ^5. and  £6   Determine  their  dep•eneracies  (that  is,  the
dimension  dep•enerate  bound  state.s  do  not  occur  (see Problem  2.45),  but  in three 
dimensions  they  are  very coiiilnon.
(c)   What  is the dep•eneracy  of  E   , and  why  is this case interesting?

4.1.2  The Angular Equation
Equation  4.17 determines the dependence of     on 8 and $;  multiplying  by Z sin- 8,
it  becomes:
sin 8 —              ’3 Y          b- Y  =   —/(I -l-  1) sin' 8 X.                      [4.18]
You inip•ht  recop•nize  this equation—it  occurs in the solution  to Laplace's equation in 
classical  electrodynaniics. As always,  we try separation  of    ai‘iables:

[4.19]
P1ugp•ing  this  in,  and  dividinp•  by  (-)4›,  we  find:
1            d

—   sin s—
-G           d8
sin 8           + I(/ +  1) sin' 8                   =  0.
The first  term  is  a function  only  of 8, and  the second  is a function  only  of  $.  so each  
must  be a constant. This  time‘ I'll call  the separation constant  iii-:
l            d
sin 8 —    sin 8                                                                             [4.20]

[4.21)

A•tlin. thcrc is no loss of* •ci1ci alia  licrc, since at this sta•e iii cculd be any c‹›mpIcx  
nuinhei: ii1  a  moment.  though.  we  will  disct›x cr  tllat  ill  must  in  I tct  hc  ai1  
iii/‹•,q‹'/'.  Bc»i'ni e:  Tllc  lc•ttei   ill  is now  dt›ing  tl‹›ublc  duty.  a.s  /›iri.s.   
anct  as  a  s •p:tration  constant.  There  is  nn  graccI‘ul  way  to  avoid  this cc›nI”usiun.  
since  butli  uses  an   standard.  Some  author s  now  switch  tu  M  or  /‹  to   ma.ss,  but  I 
 txttc  tu change  not. ticn  in  uiid-strcanJ,  and  I don“t  think  confusion  will  «ise. as  
tiny :‹s  you  al e av'are  cl” the pi‘cbIcm.


136          C/ ‹fpter  4     Quutitum Mechatiics  in Three Di›neiisio›is

The Q equation  is easy:

(4.22]


latter  by  allowing  iii   to  run  negative.  There  could  also  be  a  constant   factor  in 
front,  but  we iiiipht  as well  absorb  that  into O.  Incidentally,  in electrodynamics we would 
 write  the  aziinuthal  function  (4›)  in  terms  of  sines  and  cosines,  instead  of 
exponentials,  because electric  potentials  must  be i eal. In quantum  mechanics  there is  no  
such  constraint,  and  the  exponentials   are  a  lot  easier  to  work  with.]  Now, w  en      
a       nces    y          were          o     esa    epo   i    nspace   see     gure            
so
it  is  natural  In  ren,tiire  that5


In  other  words,  expel iii($ -F 2c)]  =  exp(I iii$),  or exp(2xini)  =  1. From  this  it 
follows  that iii  must  be an integer .

ri  = 0, 1.1,  J2,  ...                                          [4.24j




sin 8        sin 8 dG d8
is  no  so siinp         e so    ion  i.s

1[1 -]- 1) sin‘ 8 — iit')O =  0,
[4.25j


O(8) =  A P;"' (cos 8),

where  P|“  is the associated  Legendre function, defined  by
[4.26]



[4.27]

and  P;(.x) is the /th Legendre  polynomial,  defined  by  the Rodrigues formula:




s  is  n         s   p      y    i   i        oo             er            ie   ›                   
    c i        (              s          c       u reyardl 'ss  ot‘ ni.  In  Section  I.3   we'll  
ohtain  the  condition  on  iii  by  itn  entirely  dil’l’erent      and  more compelling      
argulnent.

Section 4.1:  Schrâdinger  E quntion iii 8b/7ericnf  Coordinates         137

TABLE 4.1:     The first few  Legendre  polynomials,  P;(.r):  {a) functional  form,







Pg —- $—(.35.v‘ — 30.v' + 3) Ny =    (63.v' — 70.i’* + 15a)

(a)                                                             (b)

For example,
Pn(.v       1.      PI t Y)       )        i v    —  i)   =   .v,


2 (3.r‘ — 1).
and so on. The fir.st few Legendre  polynomials are listed in Table 4. I. As the name suggests,  
P;{.v)  is a polynomial  (of degree /) in .v, and is even or odd accordinp• to the parity  of 1. 
But  Ph”'  .v)  is  not,  in general,  a polynonual—if  iii  is odd  it carries
a factor of  IQ:


l                                                                      ‹1     l
—(
d.v    2

3     — 1)    =  3.


Ph-(.x)      (\   — .  -)                  —(3.  '  —   )        3(I  — .i-),
-                             r/z         2
etc. (On  the other  hand,  what  ive  need  is  P|” (cos 8), and  Al  — cos* 8 =  sin 8, so Ph"' 
(com 8)  is  always  a  polynoiiiial  in  cos 9,  multiplied—if  ot  is  odd—by  sin 9. Some 
associated  Legendre  functions  of cos ñ  are  listed  in Table 4.2.)
Notice  that  I  must  be  a  nonnegative  integer , for  the  Rodrigues  formula  to m‹iic  ‹tny  
scnse,  moreover,  ii  lin|       i,    tncn  Equ‹ttiOn    .Z /  s‹iys  r'J”  —  u.  ror  ‹my g•i  
en  /, then,  there are (21 +  1)  possible  values of  ix:

iti      —i.  —i      i .   ...    .   — 1.  U,   1,  ...   ,  !  —  *. -!
(*-*+l
But wait! Equation 4.25 is a second-ordei’ diffei'ential  equation: It should  have fn›o linearly  
independent  solutions,  for  stir;  old  values  of  I  and  ni.  Where  are all  the



m7  te               z  t
ic       c
mOslo  s                                       e

TABLE 4.2:    Some associated  Legendre  functions,  f°J” (cos 8): la) functional  forITI,
b) graphs of i  =   P$" (cos P )  {in  these plots i-  tells voii  the magnitude  oi  the  
functi‹in  in


P!' =    (3 cos'  8 —  I )







SI I1










other  .solutions’?   Arielther:   1 hey  e.w.ir.  ot  course.  ‹is  mathematlC0l   .solutions  to  
the

and/or 8 =  n  (see ProbleiTl  4.4).
Now,  the voltHne elelTlcnt  in spherical  coordinates⁷ is

[4.30]









It  is cunvenicnt  to noriiialize  R  and  Y  sepai ately:


[4..3 l ]


Section 4.1:    Cl7TOditiget  E mation in Spherical  Coot Minutes         139
TABLE 4.3:   The first few spherical  harmonics,  FJ"(fi. d).
Y q“-- ——      „)   ¹   Sin*0e -+lij›
y 0                                                                  r*  =     7    "   (5 cos* t9 
— 3 cos t9)

Y -“  = ? (,;;,',)'° sin 6 (5 cos' d — 1)e-i’

r0=(J6,)  '   (3 cos'fl — 1)             '   '    (32.)    sin' P cos 0e


The  normalix.ed  aneiilar  wave  function.s    are called  spherical  harmonics:


4                               P”' (cos B).

where  e  =  (—1)"'  for  i›i  >  0 and  c  =  1 for  iii  <  0.  As  we shall  prove  later  on. 
they  me automatically  orthogonal,  so



In Table 4.3 I have listed the first few spherical  harmonics. For historical rea.sons, I
is called the azimuthal quantum number, and iii the magnetic quantum number.

+Problem  4.3  Use  Equations  4.27,  4.28,  and  4.32,  to construct  r₀  and  r   . Check that  
they  are  nornialized  and orthogonal.


Problem 4.4  Show  that
O(8) =   A 1n[tan(8/2j]



for consistency  with  the  notation  we  will  be  using  in  the  theory  of  angular’  momentum: 
 it  i   flQi}. Cl1ñbl
standard.  though  scmc  oldci  books  use  olher  conventions.  Notice  thzk






satisfies  the  tP  equation  (Equation  4.2.5),  for l  -   m      0. This  is  the  unacceptable


Problem  4.5  Use Equation  4.32 to construct Y!(8. ‹:f) and  r3(P. d). (You can take P   from 
Table 4.2, but you'll  have to work out  P¿  Tom Equations  4.27 and 4.28.) Check  that  they  
satisfy  the  angular’ equatlon  (Equation  4.18),  for  the  appropriate values of  /  and  ni.

Problem  4.6  Starting front  the Rodrigues formula,  derive  the orthonormality con- dition  for'  
Legendre  polynomials:

2
2/     1                                    [4.34]
Hinl: Use intep•ration  by  parts.


4.1.3  The Radial Equation

Notice  that  the angular part  of the wave  t'tinction,  Y{8, Q), is the same for all  spher- 
ically  symmetric  potentials;  the  actual  slici;›e  of  the  potential,  V (r),  affects  only 
the  rodi i/  part  of  the  wave function.  R[i  ), which  is determined  by  Equation  4.16:



/“"


This equation  siiTlpliftes  if  we change  variables:  Let


so  th
and  hence
[4.35j


[4.36]





This  is called  the radial equation;’  it  is  f‹:IeiitfCñl in [or in  to  the one-dimensional 
Schrodinp•er  equation  (Equation  2.5), except  that the effective  potential,

[4.38]


"Those  iii’s  are  runs.te.s,  of’  course—the   hcp‹ir‹ition   constant   ni  does  not   appear  
in   the  radial
9 ]URtlO3l.


Sechioti 4.1:  Schrodinger  Eqtiatioti iti Spherical  Coordinates         141

contains  an  extra  piece,  the  so-called  centrifugal  term,  tit - J2m)  1[1 -|-  I)/ i   ].  
It tends  to  throw  the  particle  outward  (away  from  the orig•in),  just  like  the  centrifu-

uatlon  4.31   becomes



That's as far as we can  p•o  until  a specific  potential  V(r)  is provided.




0,



o u  on:     u s   e    e we       e  wa  e   un    on   s   ero   i  s   e  t  e  we       e ra  
ia





k  ——                                                            [4.42]

as  usual.  Our  piobleni  is to solve  this equation,  subject  to the boundary  condition ii(‹i) 
=  0. The case 1     0 is easy:

,   =   —I'ti   M    H(r)       A sin(I i ) +   B cos(ki  ).


blows  up  a.s  i   —›  0. So'⁰  we  musi  choose  B      0.  The  boundary  condition  then 
requires sin  ka) =  0, and hence ka     us,   for some integer ii. The allowed energies





1/r   at  the  tiririn  i.i  nornialix:ible  (because  of’ the  r-   in  Equ‹ition  4.31).  For  it 
 lnore  ctiinpclliiiz  prool’ thitt  fi  = 0. sec R. Sliankiir.  Pi‘inrip/t•J  r2/ Q_liriiiffiiii 
M‹•‹-liniii‹-.  (Plenum.  New  York.  1980).  p. 351.

the same as for the one-dimensional  infinite  square  well (Equation  2.27).  Normal- izinp•  o(r) 
 yields  A  ——     2    ; tacking  on  the angular  part  (trivial,  in  this instance, since Y0(9, 
$)  =  l/         ), we conclude  that

[4.44]

Notice  that  the stationai‘y  states are  labeled  by thi ee  quantum  numbers,  ii, 1, and
iii:  J„t„,(r, 8, Q).  The  eiie,rg y,  however,  depends  only  on ii  and  l:   Egg  .
The  q•enera1  solution  to  Eouatlon  4.41  ffor  an  ai bfti ai     inteq•er  l    is  not  so
familiar:
[4.45]

where  ii(x) is the soherical Bessel function of order 1, and  url.v)  is the spherical Neumann  
function  of  order 1. They  are defined  as follows:

[4.46]


for  example,

5( )-

sni :  o()=

cos .


/l(') — (—-*J'
sin .r )        Sl11.Y          COS  .Y

1     If         ’    Slfl A               9        1     £f          .\  COS   A   —  Slfl .1

.v d.v           .v
.Y‘       —
v dx
.v!




anci  so  on.   !L Re  nrsi  rew  spnencai  oessel  anti  ineuinann   runcilOiis  are  iisieo  in
Table 4.4.  For  small  .i  (where   sin.r   =   .v  — .x3g3 !  +  .v5-/5-!  —          and  cos.v
l  — .r'/2 +.v  /4! —       ),





etc.  lxoHcc  inal  dresser   iunc nuns  at c   jiii we  ‹n  inc  origin,   nut  /ocimxcmui   i 
unciions
1 lot i' up  at  the  orig•in.  According•ly,  we must  have  Bi      0, and  hence

[4.47]


Section 4.1:  Scl râdinger  Equntion in Spherical  Coordinates         143
TABLE 4.4:    The first few spherical  Bessel  and Neumann  functions, n          v         y       
     i                        i







2!/!                                            (2/ )!



ns             und                                                                                  
            en
such  that


that  is,  (ka)  is  a  zero of  the  /th-order  spherical  Bessel  function.  Now,  the  Bessel
gunc  iuons are osc    a o      see                   reac    one    as an   n   ni een        er o 
   eros








.4


.3



.2—*
f
I
f
.1         y
/ — 3






6

— 1


-2



FIGURE 4.2:    Graphs of the first four spherical Bessel functions.


144          Chnp ter 4    QuntNuli1 Mec/tunics iii Three  Diriietisions

But  (unfortunately  t'or  ris)  they  ai‘e  not  located  at  nice  sensible  points  (such  as  
ii, or  cix,  or  something):  they  have  to  be  computed  nuiiicriCa11y.¹'  At  any  rate,  the 
bounclary  condition  requires  that



where  )„  is the Cth zero o1 the ltd   spherical  Bessel function. The allowed enerp•ies, thcn, 
are •piven  by
[4.50]



[4.5 l]

with   the  constant   A      to  be  deterlTlined   by   normalization.  Each  energy   level   is 
(2f  -   I )-told  de•qenerate,  since  there  are  (2f  -1-  1)  dlfferent   Villues  of  ni  for  
each value  of 1 (see  Equation  4.29).



Problem  4.7


(D)   ñxpanñ  iiie  sines  anñ  cosines  to  Ofirain  appi oXllNaie  formulas  for  ii  (.rj  and 
u,(v ),  valid  when  .i  N   1.  Confirm  that  they  blow  up  at  the  orip•in.



(a)   Check  thin  Ar /  (kr)  satisfies  the  radlal  equation  With  V(r) =  0 and  l  ——  1,
(b)   DeteriTline  graphically   the  allowed  ener3ie.s  for  the  infinite  spherical  well, when 
 /  —  1.  Show  that  for  laige  ii,  E„         (/i-“v‘/2iiiri-)(ii +   l /2)'.  hint. First  
show  that  ii (-     =   0 —› .r  =   tan.i .  Plot  x  and  tan .r  on  the  same  p•raph,
and  locate  the points  of  intersection.



’ ’ Ahl ‹ii11ou^ilz  .url Steyul›. els.. Ll‹iii‹ll›‹›‹›k ‹›/”M‹itliem‹i/i‹ nl r un‹ ri‹›iis. (D‹ 
vci‘.  New  Ynrk.  I ‘J55).
CI1‹igter  10.  pl ox'idcs  : n  exten  ivc  listing.


Seffioff  4.2:  The Hydrogen  Atom          145


+Problem  4.9  A  particle of  mass iii  is placed  in  a finite  spherical  well:


0,         if  r  >  n.

Find  the  ground  state,  by solving  the  radial  equation  with  1      0. Show  that  there is 
no bound  state if  You-  < u'ñ    /8in.


4.2  THE HYDROGEN ATOM
The  hvdrop•en  atom consists  of  a heavy,  essentially  motionless  proton (we  may  as well put  
it  at  the origin),  of charge e, together  with a much  lighter electron (charp•e
—e)  that  orbits  around  it,  borind  by  the  mutual  attraction  of  opposite  charges (see
Figure  4.3).  From  Couloinb's  law,  the  potential  energy  (in  SI  units)  is

[4.52]


and  the radial  equation  (Equation  4.37) says

e'     l                               ——  En.



[4.53]


Our  pi oblein  is to solve  this equation  for ii (i’),  and determine  the  allowed  energies,
E.  The hydrogen atom is .such an ilTlportant  case that I'm not p•oinp• to hand  you the solutions 
 this  time—we'll  work  their  out  in detail,  by  the  method  we used  in  the analytical  
solution  to the harmonic  oscillator. (If any  step in this process is unclear, ynii   may   wish  
In  refer  hark  fn  5ieotinn  7.3.7  fnr  n  innre  oniiiplete  explanation  )



electron

+e
(proton)




rIGuRE 4.3:    The hydrogen atom.


J46          Chapter  4    @tiatitum  Mecbeiiics iii Three Dimetisions

Incidentally,  the Coulomb potential (Equation  4.52) admits  roiiiiiit‹um  states (with
€  >  0),  describinp•  electron-proton  scat1ei‘ing.  as  well  as  discrete  found  states,


4.2.1  The Radial Wave Function


[4.54]


mo                                         or   o  n   s a es        s  ne  a
hnve
i     e          i  l  in        u    on            y       we
1  I'm                      vie-        1         l(l +  1)

This sup•pgests  that  we introduce







f  ‘ft
=      l  —  —p0

—1-                                                            [4.56]

Next   we  exaiiiine   the  asyiiiptotic   torni  of  the  solutions.   As  p   —+   on,  the





The  gcnei al  solution  is
ii(p) =  he      +  Be   .                                            [4.57]





for large  p. On the other hand, as  p  —r  0 the centrifugal  term dominates; ¹'  approx- iiately, 
then:
‹I"-ii       I(I  -F  I)


’ 'This  iir¿unJcl1t  c1ccx'  not  apply  \vI1«i1  /  —  0  (tiltliough  the  conclusion.  Equation 
 4.59,  is  in  fact v:II i‹I  I1r   I h'il  rn<e  lnrl1   !\tll  Itr vl  r  i11i url'  A I I  I  
‹iln  I rvinc'  In  ‹Tn  i :  nnlvitlr   tCilvr  »ir›/ft*r/7inH   lcir  n  ‹•hnnpr ol‘ variablcs  
(Equation  4.60).


Secfion  4.2:  The H)!drogen  Atom          147
The  •qeneral  solution  (check  it!) is
y(p)      Cp'+'  —I—  Dp  '.
but  p*'  blows  up (as  p —+  0), so  D     0. Thus
[4.59]

one

for  small  p.
e  ne      s ep  is   o  pe
function  v(y)


yn p o ie    e       io      n ro  ucinp•      e  ne
tf(p) =  p'+' e*   u(p),                                       [4.60]

in  ie







and

d  x


p e           —     —         p

1  1 +    I      u

In  terrors  of  v(p),  then,  the  radial  equation  (Equation  4.56)  reads



p «!P-
+  2(/ +   1  —  p) ‹ip +   two — 2(/ -1-  1 )]U      0.
(4.61]




111   p :
Finally,  we  assume  the  solution,  u(p), can  be  expressed  as  a  power  series

(4.62]


Our  problelTl  is  to  detemiine  the  coefficients  (c9. r; . c2.... ).  Differentiatinp•  term 
by  ter in:



[In  the second summation  I have  renamed  the “dummy  index”:  ;  —›  ;  +  1.  If  this troubles 
 you. write out  the first few terms explicitly,  and ‹’liee'k  it. You  may object


148       Chapter  4       .ixatitiiin Mecl›niiics  in Three Di/7ze›zsiorzs

that  the  sum  should  now  begin  at  ;  =   — 1,  but  the factor  ( /  +  l)  kills  that  term 
anyway,  so we  might  as well  start at zero.] Differentiating again,




Insertinp•  these into Equation  4.61, we have


/=0                     j=0


-2  jm, i•;  P'’ + inn -  2(/ + *)i } „•,P’‘ —--

Equating  the coefficients  of like  powers yields






  2(j  -   1 +   1) —  to   
+'          ( /  -    l)( i -l- 2/ -I- 2)
[4.63]


We  start   with  •’o  (this  becomes  an  overall  constant,   to  be  fixed  eventually   by 
noi'inalization),  and  Equation  4.63  g•ives  us c   ; putting  this  back  in,  we  obtain  c„ 
and  so  on.' '
Now  let's see  what  the coefficients  look  iike for large  J  (this corresponds  to large  p, 
where  the hlghei  powers  dominate).  In  this regime  the  recursioli  formula says"
2
1 + i

''You  might  wolidcr  why  1  ditln‘t  use  the  series  liictliod  directly  on  ii(p) —why  
lactor  out  the asyniplotic   beli‹ivior  bctore  :ipplyinp  this  procedure?   Well.  the  reason 
 tor  peeling  off  p'+ '   is  largely aesthetic: Without  tlâls.  the sc9Uence would begin  with 
a long string of zel os (the fi i'st nonzero coefficient bcitag  ‹-¿y j ):  by  1'actoring  out  
p'“   '   wn•  obtain  it  series  that  starts  out  with  p’.    The  ‹•**   l'actor  is  more 
critical— il” yuu  r/n/t’f   pull  thnt  out,  you  gel  a  thl ce-tern1  recursion  forlllula,  
involving  ‹'y+   ,  r-/¿ j .  anal
‹'y  (r/¿\’  it!)  incl  chat  is enormously  in‹›re  Jil"hculc  It›  woi k  wich.
You  might  ask  why  Z  dun"t  cli‘oy  like  I  in  .i +  ’I—al"tcr  all. I  am  ignoring  *(/  +  
I ) —  p   in  the nuinei”atur.  ‹ml  ^I  -I- 2 in  tlic  Jennminatur.  In  this  approximation  it 
 would  he  fine  to droy  thc  1 ar  well. but  keeping  it  makes  the  ai'gument  ‹t  little  c 
leaner.  Try  dning  it  without  tlme  1..  ancl  you”II  see  wlJal  I mean.


Section 4.2:  The Hydrogen  Atom        149
Suppose for a moment  that  this  were exact. Then
[4.64]

u(p) =   o





)——0'



••(P) -   c0p!+ e •
[4.65]


behavior  we file ’i  want, in Equation  4.57. (It's no accident  that it reappears here; after  
all,  it  does  represent  the  asyinptotic  fonn  of  .some  .solutions  to  the  radial 
equation—they  just don't  happen  to be the ones we're interested  in, because  they

ter itiiiinte. There  must  occur some  maximal  integer,  ;p„, such  that



(and beyond which all coefficients  vanish automatically). Evidently (Equation  4.63)



DeFininp•

(the so-called  principal  quantum  number),  we have


=  2ii.

But  Po  deterinincs  E  (Equations  4.54  and  4.55):



so the allowed  enerp•ies  are
4.68








[4.70)

150            ChuDter 4    Ouantum Mechanics in Three Dimensions

This  is the famous  Bohr formula     by  any  measure  the most  important  result in

of  inapplicable  classical  physics  and  premature  quantum  theory  (the  Schrodinger equation  
did not come  until 1924).
Combining  Equations  4.55 and 4.68,  we find that

1       1                                      [4.71]

whxe


a  ——
=  0.529  x 10  '    rn
[4.72]


is  the  so-called  Bohr radius.  "  It follows  (again,  fi om Equation  4.55) that

[4.73]

The spatial  wave functions for hydrogen are labeled by three quantum numbers (n,
I, and  m):


where  (referring  back to Equations  4.36 and 4,60)



and  r(p) is a polynomial  of  degree  yp„ =  n  —    — 1  in  p, whose coefficients  are 
determined  (up to an overall normalization factor) by the recursion formula



The ground state (that is, the state of lowest energy) is the case n —  l ;   fitting in the  
accepted  values for the  physical constants,  we get:



E    —         2J2    4    ,)‘      =  —13.6 eV.

[4.77]



’"It  is  traditional   to  write  the  Bohr  radius  with  a  subscñpt:  u9.  But  this  is  
cumbersome  and unnecess‹iry,  so 1 prefer  to le‹tx e thc  subsci‘ipt  off.                        
                                                                                    i

Section 4.2:  the  Hydrogen Atom        151
Evidently  the binding energy of hydrogen (the amount  of energ•y  you would have to impart to the 
electron in the ground state in order to ionize the atom) is 13.6 eV. Equation  4.67 forces  / =  
0, whence also m =  0 (see Equation  4.29), so
100
The  recursion  formula  truncates  after  the  first  term  (Equation 4.7G  with  y  =   0
yields ct  =  0), so v[p) is a constant  (co). and

Rio(r) =  —e  ' '‘
/° i‹› ''*‹'——  ' *    °•—"-'° r°-«r —— •
[4.79]
t,

=  2/      . Meanwhile
IS
4s,  and hence the ground state of hydrogen

                  rJa.
[4.80]

If n =  2 the energy is



—13.6 eV
4



=  —3.4 eV;




[4.81]
this is the first excited state—or rather, .males, s‘ince  we can have either  / =  0 (in which  
case  m  =  0) or        1  (with  in  =  —1,  0,  or  Al); evidently  four  different states share 
this same energy. If 1     0, the recursion relation (Equation 4.76) gives
ci  =  —  o  (using  y  =  0),     and    c2 — 0 (using  j  =  1),
so n(p   — cp(1 —  p), and therefore

[4.82]

[Notice  that  the  expansion  coefficients  (cj} are completely  different  for different quantum  
numbers  fl  and  /.]  If    =  1 the  recursion  formula  terminates  the  series after a single  
term; n(p) is a constant, and we find



21(
r        Cg
4a'-
[4.831
(In  each  case  the  constant  ro  is  to  be  determined  by  normalization—see  Prob- lem 4.11.)





For arbitrary  n, the possib1:e  values of f  (consistent  with Equation  4.67)  are

1 — 0, 1, 2,  ...   , n — 1,                                      [4.84]

and for each  / there are  (2/ + 1) possible  values of  m.  (Equation  4.29), so the total 
degeneracy of  the energy  level  En *1

/i -1




The polyTlomial n(p) (defined by the recursion formula, Equation  4.7t›) is a function


as
n(p) —  L2'+  1(2p),


dx
is an associated  Laguerre  polynomial,  and

Lq(x)  —e"

[4.86]







[4.88]


is the qth Laguerre poljmomial,¹⁶ (The first few Laguerre  polynomials  are listed in  Table  4.5;  
some  associated  Laguerre  polynomials  are  given  in  Table 4,6.  The first few  radial  wave 
functions  are listed  in Table  4,7,  and  plotted  in Figure 4.4.)
en             e     y   ogenwa  e     nc  on      e



n —                  r  nn       r                                         (2r/rin)   Y"’(8, Q).

[4.89]


They  are  not  pretty,  but  don't  complain—this  is  one  of  the  very  few  realistic systems  
that  can  be  solved  at  all,  in  exact  closed  form.  Notice  that  whereas  the
a  e    nc ions   e  en        a       ee qu           nu     ers     e e  e               ua  on
are determined  by  o  alone.  This is  a  peculiarity  of  the  Coulomb  potential;  in  the

"As   usual,  there. arc rival  normalization  conventions  in  the  literature; 1 have adopted  
the  most nearly standard  one.
"Tf    vini  want  It›  sec  how  ltte no;-maliz.atitan fartor  is  calculated,  study  (for  
example)   I..   Schiff @itnnnini Dec/iaiiicx,  2nd  ed.,  (McGraw-Hill,  New  York,  1968).  page  
93.

Section 4.2:  The Hvdrozen Atom         153
i All      4.a:     I he first iew Laguerre poiynomiais, Lq(x).












TABLE 4.6:    Some associated Laguerre polynomials,  L  p   (x).

L0  1                                  L0

LQ=—.r+1
L   —  —6x + 18

L.0
— 4x + 2
LJ— 12x' — 96x + 144

L1=1
L l  = —2z + 4
L      6
L       —24   + 96
L2  = 3x’ — 18a +  18             L2 — 60x2 — 600a +  1200

case  of  the  spherical  well,  you  may  recall,  the  energies  depend  also on  I  (Equa- tion 
4.50). The wave functions: are mutually  orthogonal:

F4.901

This  follows  from  the  orthogonality   of  the  spherical  harmonics  (Equation  4.33) and  (for 
 n        n')  from  the  fact  that  they  are  eigenfunctions  of  H   with  distinct 
eigenvalues.
Visualizing the hydrogen wave functions is not easy. Chemists llke to draw“den-
sity plots,” in winch the brightness o1 the cloud is proportional  to |/  |'  (Figure 4 o).
..      .     ...    m..         n.   .. n  .u               n          ....r.    ..    r        ., 
             «.n.i. ..
density  (Figure  4.6).

Problem 4.10  Work  out  the radial  wave  functions  °ao. A3i. and  A32.  using  the
recufsion formula  (Equation  4.76).  Don't  bother  to normalize  them.

TABLE 4.7:    The first few radial wave functions for hydrogen,
r.    r

°io   — 2a ”² exp(  r/o) 1    —3/2

R2         1                        P (—r/2s)




/2(}_         exp (—r/3a)
27  6

          3         2
0

xp(-r/3«)

81
3/2 (}   _    3  T
4


(       )2
8

192(a )’)  exp (—r/4a)

a    /2   1      I   r
4  a
(       )2)
80            a
p (—r/4s)

42 -     i   
64 5
1        -3/2.
1
12
3
cup
2exp (—i-/4a)

(—r/4ft)




Problem 4.11






+Problem 4.12
(a)   Using Equation 4.88, work out the first four Laguerre  polynomials.
(b)   Us‹ng Equations  4.86, 4.87, and 4.88, find  v‹p), for the case n — 5,    =  2. recursion  
formula  (Equation  4.76).


Section 4.2:  The Hydrogen  Atom        lS S








G.7
•
0.6
t10
i

I I







0.3  •  ˡ

3
0.2%
.       ’t     31
\


0.1  tJ


r/a
30    •
’’-   20

FIGUM 4.4:    Graphs of the first few hydrogen radial wave functions, R„¿(r).


+Prob1em 4.13

(a)   Find  (r)  and  (r*)  for  an electron  in the ground  state of  hydrogen.  Express
.your answers in terms of  the Bohr radius.
(b)   Find  (x)  and  (x2) for ari clectron  tit the ground state of hydrogen.  Hint.‘  This 
reouires  no  new integration—note  that  r²  —  x² +  v* +  z2, and  exploit  the symmetry  of  
the ground state.
(c)  Find  (x²)  in  the  state  n  —  2,  I  =   1,  rt  ==  1.  Warning:   This  state  is  not
symmetrical  in x,  y, z. Use  x  —— r sin 8 cos Q.


















,0,0)











(4,1,0)

(3,1,0)







(4,2,0)

(4,0,0)










(4,3,0j

FIGURE 4.5:    Density  plots for  the hydrogen  wave functions    t,  /,  m). Imagine  each plot  
to be rotated  about  the (vertical)  z  axis. Printed by pcrmission  using  “Atom in  a Box,” 
v1.0.8, by Dauger Research. You can make your own plots by going to the Web site http://danger.com.


Problem 4.14  What is the itios//3FGbabfe value of  r,  in the ground state of  hydro-
gen? (The answer is n  i zero!) Slur: First you must figure out the probability  that


Problem 4.15  A hydrogen  atom starts out in the following  linear combination  of
the stationary  states n     2, 1     1, iii =  1  and ii  — 2, ./      1, m      —1:
'V(r. 0)        1
+   421—1).

(a)   Construct  T(r, t). Simplify  it as much  as you can.
{b)   Find  the  expectation  value  of  the  potential energy,  (V). (Does it  depend  on f?) Give 
 both the fo:rmula  and the  actual number,  in electron  volts.


Section 4.2:  The 11)‹drogeti  Atori


V20O











)J310)























FIGURE  4.6:    Surfaces  of  constant  |/  12  for  the first  New  hydrogen  wave  functions. 
Reprinted by permission from Siegmund Brandt and Hans Dieter Dahmen, The Picture Book of Quantum 
Mechanics, 3rd ed., Springer, New York (2001).


4.2.2  the   Spectrum  of Hydrngen

In principle,  if you  put a hydrogen  atom into some stationary state W„ ,q, it should

say, or by shining light on it), the electron may  undergo a transition  to some other stationary  
state—either  by  absorbing  energy,  and  movinp•  up  to  a  higher-energy state, or by  giving  
off   energy  (typically  in  the form  of  eleetromap•netic radiation),


and moving  down." In practice such perturbations  are always  present;  transitions (or, as tney  
are sometiiiies  called,   quantum  jumps   ) are constantly  occurring,  and
th r•  roar i It   ) u  that  u   onntoirwr  rnf  hyd   ringr•n  gi vr•x   nff   li ght    (nhritnn 
s),  whnur•  r•nr•rgy
corresponds  to the difference  in energy  between  the initial and final states:

[4.91]

Now,  according  to the Planck formuIa,¹'  the energy  of  a photon  is propor- tional  to its 
frequency:
[4.92]

Meanwhile,  the  wavelength  is given by X =   c/v,   o


—  —— R                                                             [4.93]



where

in           e-

2
— 1.097  x 10⁷ m

[4.94]


4       HU   W 11  fib    HU     f    J  L3kFUA @  III     I D b4Sklk    K    (Uc1¥1U1I   '•f . V N 
  IN   LIIG   WJ   L2 LJUA @  AU£ ââxt  â*n  A HL   Al  t•r
sDectrum of hvdroeen: it was discovered emoiricallv  in the ninetcenth  century. and the greatest 
triumph of Bohr's theory was its ability to account for this result—and to caicuiate  «  in terms 
or me  runoamentai  constants  or  nature.  iransnions  to tnc

the Lyman series. Transitions  to the first excited state  (n¿  =  2) fall in the  visible region;  
they  constitute  the  Balmer  series.  Transitions  to  n¿  =   3  (the  Paschen
»Gr*Ga/  arcr     xc   iiiirarc‹i;   ›«   »   r     t»   r    gure    .  2.  t      »      l    »p  
  r«L  r  , hydrogen  atoms are in the ground state; to obtain the emission  spectrum you  must 
first populate the various excited states; typically this is done by passing  an electric spare  
trnuugri  ific  gas.j


Problem 4.16  A hydrogenic atom consists of a single electron orbiting a nucleus


“By  its  naturc.  this  involves  a time-dependent interaction,  and  the details  will  have  to  
wait  for anapter  v,  ror our  picscnt purposes  tne dictum mecnanism  irivoiveti  is. in  
natcriai.
'The phcitnn  is a  quantum of electromagnetic radiation,  it.’s a relativistlc  ubject. .ii’ there 
ever was one,  and  thercfore  outside  the  scope  of  nonrelativistic quantum  mechanics.  It 
will  be  uscful  in  a few pi•zc ez  to. spcak  of  photons,  and to invoke  the Planck formula  
for  their cnergy,  but pleasc bear .in  mind that  this is external  to the thcory  we are 
developing.


Sectiun 4.2:  'rave  H ydrugen  Afar         159





-1.0  —


q n
-4.0
-5.0  —
l       4
Bame                        2
series




-8.0
—9.0  —
—10.0
—11.0  —
—12.0
—13.0  —
i      r      r                                              1
—14.0  —   Lyman series

FIGURE 4.7:    Energy  levels and transitions in  the spectrum of hydrogen.

is  doubly  ionizcd  lithium,  and  so  on).  Determine  the  Bohr  energies  E„(Z), the binding 
energy  E  (Z), the Bohr radius n(I), and the Rydberg  constant IU)    for a hydrogenic  atom. 
(Express your answers  as appropriate  multiples  of  the hydrogen values.)  Where in  the 
electromagnetic spectrum  would  the  Lyman  series fall, for Z =  2 and Z  — 3? Hint. There's 
nothing much to calculate  here—in the potential (Equation  4.52) e’       Ze  , so all you  have 
to do is wake thc same substitution in all the final results.


Problem 4.17  Consider the earth-sun system as a gravitational  analog to the hydro-
p•en  atom.

the mass of the earth, and  M the mass of  the sun.)
(b)  What is the “Bohr radius,” ‹sg, for this system? Work out the actual number.
(c)   Write  down  the  gravitational  “Bohr  formula,”  and,  by  equating  Ed,  to  the
classical  energy  of  a  planet  in  a  circular  orbit  of  radius 7„, show  that  n  =
r        . From this, estimate  the quantum  number n  of  the ’earth.

160          Chapter 4    Qianturn Mechanics in Threei Dimensions

cdl  Sunoose  the  earth  made  a  transition  to  the  next  lower  level  fn      11.  How much  
energy  (in Joulcs)  would. be released?  What  would  the  wavelength  of the emitted  photon  
(or,  more  likely,  graviton)  be?  (Express  your  answer  in light  years— is the remarkable  
answe   '  a coincidence?)


4.3  ANGULAR MOMENTUM
As  we  have  seen, the  stationary  states  of  the hy°'   s •n  atoin  arc labeled  by three 
quantum  numbers:  NJ,  /, and  m. The principal  quantum  number  (n) determines  the energy of 
the state (Equation  4,70); as it turns out, / and m are related to the orbital angular  momentum.  
In  the  classical  theory  of  central  forces,  energy  and  angular

angular  momentum  plays  a  significant  (in  fact,  even  more  important)  role  in  the quantum 
 theory.
Classically,  the angular momentum  of a particle (with respect  to the urigin) is given  by the 
formula
[4.95]

which is to say,



The  correspondinp•  quantum  operators  are  obtained  by  the  standard  prescription pg       —i 
hd/3z,  pt,       —ih b/b y,  pt  —+  —i/i8/Jz.  In the following  section  we’ll ootain   ne 
eigenvalues  of  iñe  angular  moiiientuin  operators  icy  a  pureiy  aigenraic technique  
reminiscent  nf the  nne  xve  used  in  Chapter 9  fn  get  the  allnwed  energies of the harmonic 
oscillator; it is all based on the clever exploitation of  commutation relations.  After  that we  
will  turn  to the  more difficult  problem  of  determining  the eigenfunctions.

4.3.1  Eieenvalues

The operators  Lq  and  L;  do not  commute;  in fact²’




20Thanks  to John Meyer. for pointing  this  out.
2'Note  that  all  the  operators  we  encounter  in  quantum  mechanics  (foomote  15,  Chapter  
1)  are distributive   with  re*FCCt to  addition:   AtB  -l- C)   ——   AD  4-  AC.    In  
particular,  [A,   B  -1- C   j  ——  {A.     B]  -l- [A.   C   .

Section 4.3.-  Angular  Momentum          161

from me canonical  commuianon  reiarions  (equation  4.iuj we know  mat me  oniy
runners trnrc  hr•rr•  †hot  frii f   trn  rrnrrir   utr•    re r      With   ri.    ai   with   tn 
.    sari   z  xirith   ri      fi rn
the two  middle  terms  drop out, leaving

rz  non

Of course, we could have started out with  pL y z     I or (Lt, L   ], but there is no need to 
calculate these separately—we  can get them immediately  by cyclic permutation of  the indices (x   
    J,  y  —+  z, z       x):

[4.99]

These  are  the  fundamental  commutation  relations  for  as giilar  momentum;  every-
thing  else follows  from them.
NoEce  that  L  y y  L   y z  and  Lps  are  incompatible  observables,  According  to  the 
p•eneralized  uncertainty  principle  (Equation  3.62),

p2

4
or
[4.100]

ir wouln  mereioi e ne rume to ioox lor states rnai are simuiianeousiy eigenfunctions of  L   and  
L  . On the other hand,  the .sqmm  of  the tntcil  angular  momentum,

[4.101]










rnmmutes  with  itself.1  Ii  follows,  rif  course,  that  L     also  crimmiites  with  L..   and
Lq:
[4.102]




compactTy,


So  L² is  compatible  with each component  of L, and  we cue  hope to find simulta- neous 
eigenstates  of  L’ and (say)  Lt:
and    L                                             4.104
We’L use a “ladder operator”  technique,  very similar  to the one we applied to the harmonic  
oscillator  back in Section  2.3.I.  Let
4.105
The commutator with  L   is





SO
[4.106]


[4.107]

I claim that if  f  is an eigenfunction of  L² and L„  so also is L +   : Equation 4.107

4.108

so L +    is an eigenfunction of L  , with the same eigenvalue X, and Equation 4.106



[4.109]


oso
n+     is  an  eig       nc
w te n  w  eige  v oue                  e          +
the “raising”  operator,  because  iL increases  the eigenvalue  of  L,   by  ñ,  and  La  the
“lowering”  operator,  because it lowers  the eigenvalue  by  /i.
For  a  given  value  of  X,  then,  we  obtain  a  “ladder”  of  states,  with  each “rung”  
scparated  from its neighbors  by onc  unit  of  /i  in  the eigcnvaluc  of  L,   (see Figure 4.8). 
To ascend the ladder we apply the raising operator, and to descend, the lowering  operator.  But 
this  process cannot  go on  forever: Eventually  we're going




































—3G








FIGURE 4.8:   The “ladder” of angular momentum states.

to reach  a state for wluch  the z-component  exceed:s  the ipr‹t/,  and  that  cannot  be.““


L+ ft —— 0.                                                 [4.110]



3Actually,  all  wc can  conclude is  that  E ;  f   i   iioi n‹›iiiio/ic‹rñfe—irs  norm  could  be 
inJni/r,
instead ol’ zero.. Problem  4.1S explores  this alternative.






Let  ñf  be the  eigellvalue  of  Lq  at  this  top rung  (the  appropriateness  of  the letter


[4.111]





=   L2 —  L         i(ihL  ),

or, putting it the other way around,

[4.112]

It follows  that




and hence
[4.113]

This  tells  us the eigenvalue  of  L² in terms of the mmmm  eigenvalue of  L-.
Meanwhile,  there is also (for the same reason)  a bottom  rung,  Jt,  such that

[4.114]

Let  ñl  be  the eigenvalue  of  L,  at this  bottom  rung:

[4.115]

Using Equation  4.112, we have





[4.116]


omparing    quations o1 else
, we see  t  at
,  so  ei   er


[4.117]


Section 4.3:  Angular Momenta  i

Evidently  the eigenvalues  of  L   are mA, where m (the appropriateness of ier  wi                 
  ear in a  momen    go      rom  —                      in eger    eps.
particular,  il follows that 1.      —1 +   N,   and hence f  —  N/2,  so /  must be an inrege
or a half-integ  r. The eigenfunctions are characterized  by  the numbers I and


[4.

where

1     0,  1/2,  1,  3/2,  ...  ;                                                                   
[4.119]

a  given  value  of  1,  there  are  2f  -}- 1  different  values
on the “ladder”
Some  people  like  to  illustrate   this  result  with  the  diagram  in  Figure 4.9 (drawn for 
the case 1     2). The arrows  are supposed  to represent  possible  angular momenta—in   units  of 
     they  all  have  the  same  length       (  +    )  (in  this  case
—  2.45),  and  their z  components        the  allowed  values  of
2).  Notice  that  the  magnitude  of  the  vectors  (the  radius  of  the  sphere)  is  greater

                                       ial” case 1     0.) Evidently  you can't get the angular 
momentum  to point perfectly             along  the z direction.  At first, this sounds  absurd. 
“Why  can't I just pick  my axes
so  that  z  points  alung  the  direction  u1 the  angular  momentum  vector?”  Well,  to do  this 
 you  would  have  to  know  all  three  components  simultaneously,  and  the

















FIGURE 4.9:    Angular  momentum  xtatcx (for f  m 2).






uncertainty  principle  (Equation  4.100)  says that's  impossible.  “Well,  all  right, but suroly 
once in a while, by good fortune, I will just happen  to aim my z-axis along the  direction  of  
L.”  No,  no! You  have  missed  the  point. It's not  merely  that  you don't  know  all three  
components  of  L; there  simply  aren't  three  components—a
na

defined  value,  then  L   and  L    do  not.  It  is misleading  even  to  draw  the  vectors in  
Figure  4.9sat  besl  they  should  be  smeared  out  around  the  latitude  lines,  to indicate  
that Lg  and  Lt   are indeterminate.
I  hope  you're  impressed:  By  purel y  algebraic  means,  starting  with  the  fun- damental  
commutation  relations  for  angular  momentum  (Equation 4.99),  we have deterrliined  the  
eigenvalues  uf  L    and  L,—without  over seeing the eigenfunctions themselves!  We  turn  now  
to  the  problem  of  constructing  the  eigenfunctions,  but I  should  warn  you  that  this  is 
a  much  messier  business.  Just  so  you  know  where we're  headed,  I’ll begin  with  the  
punch  line:   ft”’       Y "—the  eigenfunctions  of L²  and  L   .are  nothing  but  the  old  
spherical  harmonics,  which  we  cue     tipon  by a  quite  different  route  in  Section  4.1.2  
(that’s  why  I  chose  the  letters     and  m, of  course).  And  I  can  now  tell you  why  the 
 spherical  harmonics  are  orthogonal: They  are  eigenfunctions of  lici'inilian  operators  (L‘  
and  L,)   beloilgllig  tO  US(HICH eigenvalues  (Theorem  2, Section 3.3.1).

+Problem  4.18  The  raising  and lowering  operators  change  the value  of  ni  by one


where  A("  is  some  constant.  Question:  What i.i  A(,    if  the  eigenfunctions  are  to be 
norm,nlized*  Hint.  First  show  that  L    is the hermitian  conjugate  of  L     (since

if  you  like);  then use Equation  4.112. Answer.

[4,121]

Note  what  happens  at  the  top  and bottom  of  the ladder  (i.e.,  when  you  apply  L
to  f,  ox  La  to   ft°').



{a)   Starting with the canonical commutation relations for position and momentum
(Equation  4.10),  work  out  thc following  commutators:
›l                                                    t4.122]


Section 4.3,-  Angular  Momentum         167

(b)   Use these results: to obtain  [L, , L     — ihL      directly from Equation 4.96.
(c)  Evaluate  the  commutators  [L„  r2I  and  (L  , r2I  (where, of  course,  r

(d)   S:how  that  the  Hamiltonian  fi   =   (p   /2m) +  V   commutes  with  all  three 
components  of  L, provided  that  V  depends  only on r.  (’lhus  H,  L^,  and  L are mutually  
compatible  obscrvablcs.)


+Problem 4.20

(a)  Prove that for a particle in a potential  Y(r)  the fate of  change of’ the expec-
tation  value  of  the orbital  angular  momentum  L is  equal  to the  expectation


dt

where



(This is the rotational analog  to Ehrenfest's  theorem.)
(b)  Show that d(K)/ dt —— 0 for any spherically  symmetric  potential. (This is one form of  the 
quantum  statement  o1 conservation  of angular momentum.)




First  of  all  we  need  to  rewrite  Lg,  Lt,   and  L.   in  spherical  coordinates.  Now, L =  
(h/ i)(T  w  V), and the gradient, in spherical  coordinates,  is: ⁴


s/=›-_d
+a—-ld       ++-      1      0  
14.123)
6r           r  b8           r sin d 8$

meanwhile,  r: =  rr,  so



X   t“)          f-
kr
as+            sue b$

2  George  Arfkcn  and  Hans-Jurgen  Weber,  Mathematical  Methods  f'or Physicists,  5th  ed.,  
Aca- dcmic Prcss,  Orlando  (2000),  Section 15.



But  (r  x r)  =  0, (? x    )        , and {r°  x Q) —  —9  (see Figure: 4.1), and hence



The unit  vectors  H  and     can be resolved  into their cartesian components:


8 =  (cos 8 cos $)i  -1- (cos H sin Q)J  —  [sin d)k;
——  —(sinQ)i      (cos $)y,
[4.1251 [4.12d]
Thus







Evidently





and

—  cos   cos    i     cos    sin    J  — sin


sin Q —   —  COS


COt d  —a#
1     a
sin 8 dQ





[4.127)


[4.128]





We shall also need the raising and lowering  operators:







ta —                      [4.130]

In particular  (Problem  4.21(a)):


'
and hence (Problem  4.21(b)):
Section 4.3:  Angttlar Momentum         I K9





[4.132]



We are now  in a position to determine  J,'" (J, Q). It's an eigenfunction  of  L  ,
with  eigenvalue  /i*f(/ +  1):


L‘ffi  ——  —/12         1     d
sin H  dfi
sin 8 —

But this is precisely the “angular equation” (Equation  4.18). And it's also an eigen- function of  
Lg, with the eigenvalue  m.fi:

a  a
jj;/i" =*••fj'.

but  this is equivalent  to the azirnutlial  equation  (Equation  4.21). We have already solved 
this system of equations: The result (appropriately normalized) is the spher- ical  harmonic,  
Yl"(0, Q).  Conclusion:  Spheñcal  harmonics  are  eigenfunctions  of L   and  L,. When we solved  
the Schrfidinger  equation  by separation  of variables, in Section 4.1, we were inadvertently  
consI:ructing  simultaneous. eigenfunctions of the three commuting  operators  H, L  , and  L-:



Incidcntally, we can use Equation 4.132 to rewrite the Schrfidinger equation (Equa- tion 4.14) more 
compactly:


1
2mr2

r“—
â r         br

There  is  a  curious  final  twist  to  this  story,  for  the  nfgebrnic   theory  of angular  
momentum  permits     (and  hence  also  m)  to  take  on  fin/f-integer  values (Equation 4.119),  
whereas  separation  of  variables  yielded  eigenfunctions unly fur integer  values  (Equation  
4,29).  You  might  suppose  that  the half-integer  solutions arc spurious, but it turns out that 
they are of profound  importance,  as we shall sec in the following  sections.

170         Chapter 4    Quantum Mecfinnics in Terse dimensions


*Problem 4.21

(a)   Derive Equation  4.131 from Equation  4.130.  flint.  Use a test function; other- wise you're 
likcly  to drop some terms.
(b)   Derive  Equation  4.132  from  Equations  4.129  and  4.131.  ffini:  Use  Equa-
te   n  4 1 12


Problem 4.22

(a)  What  i:s  L+Y  1 (No calculation  allowed!)
(b)   Use the  result  of  (a),  together with Equation  4 130 and the fact  that  LpY! hlY  , to 
determine  Y  (P, d).  up to a normalization  constant.
(c)   Determine  the  normalization  constant  by  direct  integration.  Compare  your final answer 
to what you  got  in Problem 4.5.


Problem 4.23  In Problem 4.3 you showed that.

1                                           sin fi

Apply the raising operator to find  FJ(9, $). Use Equation 4.121 to get the normal-
ization.

Problem 4.24  Two particles of mass m are attached to the ends of a massless rigid rod of  length  
n. The system  is free to rotate  in three  dimensions  about  the center

(a)   Show that the allowed  energies  of  this rigid rotor  are

for    n =  0,  1,  2,

Hint.  First express the (cla.ssical) energy in terms of the total angtllar momen- tum.
(b)   What  are the  normalized  eigenfunctions for this system? What is the degen- eracy  of  the 
Cth energy level?


Section 4.4:  Shia        171



In  classical  mechanics,  a  rigid  object  admits  two  kinds  of  angular  momentum:

(S =  /c›), associated with motion nhoui the center of mass, For example, the earth has orbital 
angular momentum  attributable to its annual revolution around the sun,
‹run  8piii  anguini  iiioiiiciituiN  nuniiNg  turn  in   uaiiy  Lviat“svis ‹iuuut  inc   
iiiniii-xoutii axis. In the classical context this distinction is lareelv  a matter of convenience. 
for when  you  come  right  down  to it, S  is  nothing  but  the  sum  total  of  the  “orbital” 
angular  momenta  ot  ai1 tne  rocKs  am   dirt  ciofis  tnat  go  to mwe  up  tne cartn,  as they 
circle around the axis. But an analogous thing happens in quantum mechanics, and  here  the  
distinction  is  absolutely  fundamental.  In  addition  to  orbital  angular momentum,  associated 
 (in  the  case  of  hydrogen)  with  the  motion  of  the  electron
cii w emu      tub     risen uo   cuiCt   via our  i tart vi   in y    viii   opiUiiiLiG‹u   
iin£iiiwmG aj     tin     on  wFL Qtr     airs
carries  another  form of  angular  momentum,  which has nothing  to do with motion in  space  (and 
 which  is  not,  therefore,  described  by  any  function  of  the  position variables r, 9, Q) 
but which is somewhat analogous to classical spin (and for which, therefore,  we use the same  
word). It doesn't. pay  to press this analogy too far: The electron  (as far as  we know)  is  a  
structureless  point particle,  and  its spin angular momentum  cannot  be  decomposed  into  
orbital  angular  momenta  ot  constituent
parts (sec Problcm  4.25).-5 Suffice it to say that clemcntary particles carry intrinsic
angular  momentum  (S) in addition  to their “extrinsic”  angular  momentum  (L).
The algebraic  theory of spin is  a carbon  copy  of the theory of  orbital angular
momentum,  beginning  with the fundamental  commutation  relations:*‘

[4.134]

It follows  (as before) that the eigenvectors  of  S²  and  St  satisfy*⁷

[4.135]

*'For  a  contrary  interpretation,  see  Hans  C.  Ohanian,  “What  is  Spin?”,  And.  J.   Ph ys. 
 54,  500
(1986).
2'We shall take these as postulnte«  for the theory of spin; the analogous foimulas for orbital  
angu- lar  momentum  (Equation  4.99) were d£rired  from  the known  form  of  the operators  
(Equation  4.96). In a more  sophisticated  treatment  they  can both be obtained from rotational 
invariancC in three dimensions (see,  for example,  Leslie E.  Ballcntine,  @oatifom Mechanics:  A 
Modem Development,  World Scientific, Singapore  (1998),  Section 3.3). Indeed,  these fundamental  
commutation  relations apply  to rt/f  forms of angular  momentum,  whether  spin,  orbital,  or  
the  combined  angular  momentum  of  a  composite  system, which could  include  some  spin  and 
some  orbital.
27Because  the  eigenstates  of  spin  are  not /«ncliess,  I  will  usc  the  “ket”  notation  for 
 them.  (I Gould have  donc  the  same in  Section  4.S,  writinb    |f iti)  iR  placc  of  r   ’. 
 but  in  that context  the 1'unction notation  seems  more  natural.)  By   the  way,  I’m   
running  out  of letters,  so I'll use  m. 1or  the  eigenvalue of  S-,   just  as  I  did for  L,  
  (some  authors  write  iiiJ  and ru    at  this  stage, ,just  to  be  absolutely  clear).



172            Chapter  4         uuntum Mechan.ics  in Three Dimensions

and
[4.136]


e eigenvec ors are no

the half-integer  values of  s  and m:


[4.l37j

It  so  happens  that  every  elementary  particle  has  a  specific  and  inimutabl,e

exp
a u                 c      e ca
n o     at        cu         ec   s               n     ave   p n

spin  2;  and  so on. By  contrast,  the  orbital  angular  momentum  quantum  number I  (for  an  
electron  in  a  hydrogen  atom,  say)  can  take  on  any  (integer)  value  you

is axed,  for  any  given  particle,  and  this  makes  the  theory  of  spin  comparatively



Problem 4.25  If  the electron were a classical solid  sphere, with radius

„2
14.138)


(      s   c    ed    a      a  e e  t  o   ra         ob a ned by assu                 I  c  on s  
  a    i attributable  to energy stored in its electric field, via the Einstein formula  E      
in,c   ), and its angular  momentum is  (1/2)fi,  then how fast  (in mls)  would  a  point  on  the 
“equator”  be  moving?  Docs  this  model  make  sense?  (Actually,  the  radius  of  the

matters  worse.)




and

Section 4,4.-  SQia          173

4.4.1  Spin 1/2
By far the most important  case is 5     1/2, for this is the spin of the particles  that m   e up 
or  inary  matter   protons,  neutrons,  an   e ectrons , as  we   as       quar  s and all 
leptons. Moreover,  once you  understand  spin 1/2,  it  is a simple matter  to work out the 
formalism for any higher spin. There are just in    cigenstates:  |   '}, which  we call spin up 
(informally,    ),  and  |   (— J)), which  we  call spin  down (  ).  Using  these  as  basis  
vectors,  the  general  state  of  a  spin-1/2  particle  can  be ex  re   ed as a two-element  col 
 mn matrix   or s  inor :

+ dx—.                          [4.139)


with


represcnting  spin up, and

[4.140]


14.141]

for spin down.
Meanwhile,  the spin operators become 2 x 2 matrices, which we can work out



and
If  we write 52 as a matrix  with (as yet) undetermined  elements,




c    d


so c     (3/4)h2  and  r = 0. The second equation says
[4.142]





174          Chapter 4    Quantum Mechanics in Three Dimensions



[4.144]


from which  it follows  that






SO
s, = ‹                        ⁰   ⁰

OW

[4.145]






[4.146]




SincC    z›.    y,  and  Sq  all  carry  a  factor of  fi/2, it  is tidier  to  write  S       
(/i/2)cr, where

[4.148]


These are the famous Pauli spin matrices.  Notice  that Sq, S,., S„  and 5² are all
hermitian (as they should  be, since they represent observables). On the other hand,

The eigenspinors  of S,   are (of course):

eigenvalue   —             [4.149]

If you  measure  Sq  on a  particle in the general  state 2  (Equation 4.139), you could set +ñ/2, 
with probability  |o|*, or —ñ/2, with probability  |6|². Since these are the
possibilities,

(i.e.,  the  spinor  must  be  normnfizrd).2’

-  People  often say  that  |o|—  is: the “probability  that the  particle  is in the spin-up  
state,”  but  this

See footnote .16 in  Chapter  3.




But  what if, instead, you chose to measure  S  ? What are the possible  results,

cal interpretation, we need  to know  the eigenvalues  and eigenspinors  of S  . The characteristic 
equation is

= o w i2  —

Not  surprisingly,  the  possible  values  for  Sz  are  the  same  as  those  for  S  .  The





so Q  =  I    a.  Evidently  the (normalized)  eigenspinors  of  Sq  are



eigenva                                               eigenva


As the ciJenvectors  of  a hermitian  matrix. they span the space; the p•cncric spinor y  
(Equa:tion 4.139) can be expressed  as a linear combination  of them:





probability  of  getting  —fi/2 is  (l /2) |fI  — f |². (You  should  check  for  yourself  that
these  probabilities  add up  to 1.)






What are the probabilities  of  getting th  J2 and  —ñ/2,  if you  measure  St  and  Sz ? Solution: 
 Here a  =  (1 + z)/   6 and b     2/    6, so for S- the probability of getting
-J-fl/2 is    1 +  i)/      |²  =  1/3, and  the probability  of  getting  —fi/2  is   2/      |2
y  o          ng






the  probability  of  getting  —ñ/2 is‘ (1/2) |(—11    i)/6|²  = 1/6. Incidentally,  the




which  we could also have obtained  more directly:

(1—i)  2       h  2)    (1



I'd  like now to walk  you through an imaginary  measurenicnt scenario involv- ing  spin  1/2.  
because  it  serves  to  illustrate  in  verv  concrete  terms  some  of  the abstract ideas we 
discussed  back in Chapter 1. Let's say we start out  with a parti- cle  in  the state  2+. If  
someone  asks,  “What  is  the  z-component  of  that  particle's spin angular momentum?”,  we 
could answer unambiguously: -{-ft /2. For a measure-
.ment of S, is certain to return that value. But if our interrogator asks instead, “What is the 
x-component  of that  particle's  spin  angular  momentum?”  we are obliged  to cquivocatc:  If  
you ineasurc  S  , the  chances  arc fifty-fifty  o1 gctting  cithcr  /i/2 or
—ñ/2. If the questioner is a classical physicist, or a “realist” (in the sense of Section 1.2), he 
will regard this as an inadequate—not to say impertinent—response: “Are you telling me that you 
don’t know  the mie state of  that particle?” On the contrary; I  know  yrrr-i,sely  what  the  
state ref  th•  r••inle  i.s   y     “Well   then   hnw  crime  you can't  tell  me  what  the  
x-component  of  its  spin  is?”  Because  it  simply  does  nol have  a  particular  A-component  
of  spin.  Indeed,  it  cnnnol, for  if  both  S    and  St were  well-defined,  the uncertainty  
principle would  be violated.
At this point our challenger grabs the test-tube and measui es the x-component of its spin; let's 
say he gets the value  +fl/2. “Aha!”  (he shouts in triumph),  “You fie£f/  This  particle has  a  
perfCctly  well-dC  Iled  value  uf  Sz :  ft./2.”  Well,  sure—it does now, but that doesn't prove 
it had that value, prior to your measurement.  “You have obviously been rcduced to splitting hairs. 
And anyway, what happened to your uncertainty  principle'! I now know both S,  and  S,.” I'm  
sorry,  but you  do xml:  In the  course  of  your  measurement,  you  altered  the particle's  
state;  it  is  now  in  the state yp   , and whereas you know  the value of  Sx• you no longer 
know the value of
St.  “But I  was extremely  careliil  not to disturb  the particle  when I measured  S,.”

get. (Of  course, he mo3› get Eli /2.  which will be embarrassing  to my case—but if we repeat this 
 whole scenario over and  over, half  the time he  will  get  —ñ/2.)
To  the  layman,  the  philosopher,  or the  classical  physicist,  a  statement  of  the form  
“this  particle  doesn't  have  a  well-defined  position”  (or  momentum,  or  x- component  of  
spin  angular  momentum,  or whatever)  sounds  vague, incompetent, or (worst  of  all)  profound.  
It is none of  these. But its precise  meaning is, 1 think,



Section 4.4:  Spin          177

aimosi  impossibic  to  cunvey  to  anyone  wiio  nas  not  snitea  quantum  meciianics in  some  
depth   If  you  find  your  own  comprehension  slipping   from  time  to  time (if  you  don't,  
you  probably  haven’t  understood  the  problem),  come  back  to  the spin- 1/2  system:  It is  
the  simplest  and  cleanest  context  for  thinking  through  the




(a)   Check  that  the  spin  matrices  (Equations  4.145  and  4.147)  obey  the  funda-
mentor  cuiiiNiutauon. rT1‹iuuns  iur   an•ff tlLdL  IllOHlLHtiJl R,  Rt}UdtlOIl  H .1 dH .
(b)  Show  that the Pauli spin matrices  (Equation  4.14b)  satisfy the  product rule

[4.1531

where  the  indices  stand  for  x,  y, or  z,  and   Ski  is  the  Levi-Civita  symbol:



ruo   e    4 27  An e1mon is                n    a e                               p










rlcviati.nns   nnt  Pauli  matrices!}
(d)   Confirm  that your  results  are consistent  with all three uncertainty  principles (Equation 
 4.100  and its cyclic  permutations—only with  S  in  place of  L, of course).


+Problem 4.28  For the most general  normalized  spinor  2  (Equation  4.139), corn-
y 9     pS¿9)    (SJ.),    St),  and   (S, ).  Check  that   (Sj



em
(a)   Find  the eigenvalues  and  eigenspinors  of S,.

178           Cl apter- 4    Ciuantum   Mechanics in Three Dimensions

(b)   If  you  measured  S    on  a  particle  in  the  general  state  x  (Equation  4.139), what  
values might you  get, and what is the probability  of each? Check  that the probabilities  add  up 
to 1. Note.  o  and b need not be real!
(c)  If you measured  S$„ what values might you get, and with what probabilifies?


Problem  4.30  Construct the matrix Sp representing the component of spin anglllar momentum  along 
an arbitrary  direction r°. Use spherical coordinates,  for which


i-      sin 8 cos Q i  -l- sin fi sin Q / +  cos 6 k.

Find  the  eigenvalues  and (normalized)  eigenspinors  of  S,  .  Answer:

cos(8/2)
e'“   sin(9/2)
[4.154]




[4.1551

Note:  You're  always free to multiply  by  an arbitrary  phase factor—say,  e'   —so your answer 
may not look  exactly  the same as mine.


Problem 4.31  Construct  the  spin  matrices  (S  ,  St,   and  S,)   for  a  particle  of spin 1.  
Hint.  How  many  eigenstates  of  5,  are there?  Determine the  action  of  S„ S+,  and  So  on  
each  of  these  states,  Follow  the  procedure  used  in  the  text  for spin 1/2.


4.4.2  Electron in a Magnetic Field
A  spinning  charged  particle  constitutes  a  magnetic  dipole.  Its  magnetic  dipole moment, 
Jr, is proportional  to its spin  angular momentum, S:

[4.1561

the proportionality constant,  y,  is called  the gyromagnetic  ratio."⁰ When  a mag-
netic dipole is placed in a magnetic field B, it experiences  a torque, p x B, which

3'See,  for  example,  D.  Griffiths,  Introdu‹.lion  to Fle‹tmdynainics, 3rd ed.  (Prentice  Hall, 
 Upper Saddle  River,  NJ,   1999),  page  252.  Classically.,  the  pyromagnetic  ratio  of  ‹in 
object  whose charge  and mass  arc  identically  distributed  is  rj/"2ni,  wherc      is  the 
charge. and at  is the mass. f'oi- reasons  that  are fully  explained  only  in  rclativistic  
quantum  theory,  the  ¿yromagnetic  ratio  of  the  electron  is (almost) exactly  /wire  the  
classical  value:  y  =   —c•/»i,


Section 4.4.  Spin         179

tends  to  line  it  up  parallel  to  the  field  (just  like  a  compass  needle).  The  energy


H  =  —J   B,                                            [4,1571
so the Hamiltonian  of  a sninnine char-•ed  narticle.  at rest"²  in  a magnetic  field B.
is
[4.l5b]


Example 4.3    Larmor  precession:  Imagine  a  particle  of  spin  1/2  at  rest  in  a uniform  
magnetic  field, which points  in the e-direction:


B  —— B  k.

The Hamiltonian  (Equation  4.158),  in matrix  form, is



The  eigenstates  of H  are  the  same  as  those of S,:

with energy  E        —(y B fi)/2, with energy  E
14.159]


[4.160]

Evidently  the energy is lowest when the dipole inoinTilt is parallel to the field—just
as it would  be classically.
Since  the  Hamiltonian  is time-independent,  the  general  solution  to the  time- dependent 
Schrodinger  equation,

[4.162]

can  be expressed  in terms of the stationary states:




’ Griffiths  (loomotc 30), page 281.
'-If  the  particle  is  allowed  to  /imr6,  there  will  also  be  kinetic  energy  to  consider: 
 moreover,  it will  be  subject  to  the Lorentz  force  (qv  x  B),   which  is not  dcrivable  
from  a  potential  energy  function, and  hence  does..not  fit  the  Scluiidinger  equation  as  
we  have  forimtlated   it  so  far-.  I’ll  show  you  later on  how  to  handle  tliis  (Problem  
4.59),  but  for  the  moment  let's just  tLssume  that  the  particle .is ircc  to
›-r›far6.  but  otherwise  stationary.



180          Chapter 4    Quantum. Mechanics in Theee Dimensions

e co  st    ts     an         e   ete     ne     y    e init     con   tions





cos(a/2)  and b     sin(o/2),  where a  is a fixed  angle  whose physical  significance will appear 
in a moment. Thus

i yBo /2
sin(n/2)e"’* B  ’'²


as a function  of  time:

; s,   j =    z (›)"'Sgxtr) — (Cos(n/2)e '**""“    sin(a/2)e'‘        ’²)
0     0     1        cos(a/2)e'"*B°’'²








and
X 2     1     0        em(a/2)e   i y'B  )t/-                                                 
[4.1641





[4.166J

cnt           is ti tc   at a constant  ang e n  to t  c z-axis,  an   processes     out

[4.167]


ing  to  the  classical  laws.  But  it's  nice  to  see  how  this  works  out  in  a  specific
CORtCXt.



if  does  is  add  a constant  to t.
"*See, for instance, The F'c•ynman  Lecturers an Ph)!sics  (Addison-Wesley, ReaAng, 1964),  Volume 
II, Section  34-3:  Of  course,  in  thc classical  case  it is  the angular  momentum  vector  
itself. not  just  its expectaEon  value,  that precesscs  around  thc  magnetic  tield.

Sec.tion 4.4:  Spin        181
















FIGURE 4.10:    Precession   of   (S)   in   a uniform magnetic field.


Example 4.4    The Stem-Gerlach  experiment:  In  an  inhomogeneous  magnetic field,  there is  not 
only  a iorqpr,  but also a curre, on a magnetic  dipole:3⁵

F=Vp.B)               [4.168]
This  force  can  be  used  to  separate  out  particles  with  a  particular  spin  orienta- tion, 
 as follows. Imagine  a  beam  of  relatively  heavy  neutral  atoms,'⁶  traveling  in the  y  
direction,  which  passes  through  a  region  of  inhoniogeneous  magnetic  field (Figure  
4.11)—say,

B(x, y, z)      —axi +  (B  + a z,)k,                            (4.169]

where  Bz  i   a strong  uniform  field  and  the  constant  o  describes  a small deviation from 
homogeneity.  (Actually,  what we’d like  is just  the z component,  but unfortu- nately  that's 
impossible—it  would  violate  the electromagnetic law  9-   B =  0; like it  ter not, an  x  
ctiinponent  comes along for  the ride.)  The force  on lhCse  atoms  is



'Griffiths   (l'ootnote   30),   page  258.   Note   that  F   is   the   negative   gradient   of  
 the   energy (Equation  4.157).
"'We  make  thcm  neutral  so  as  to  avoid  the  l‹irge-scale  deflection  that  would  otherwise 
 result from  the  Lorcntz  1'orcc,  and  heavy  so  we  can  construct  localized  wave  packets  
and  treat  thc  motion iti  terms  of  classical  particle  ti’a{Jeetories.  In  practice,  the 
Stern-Gerlach  experiment  doesn’t  work,  for exaniply,  with  a  beam  of  free  electrons.

182         Chat›ter 4    Ouantum Ms6bnnics in three Dimensions

Spin  up





Spin down
Magnet




Rut  because. of  the  I.armor  precession  about  Bo.  .*:•  oscillates  mpidly,  and
nvernges  to  zeto, the net  force is in the z direction:

§9.*L / Uj


and  the  beam  is  deflected  up  or  down,  in  proportion  to  the  z  component  of  the spin 
angular momentum.  Classit'nlly  we'd expect a smear  (because  S,  would not be  quantized),  but  
in  fact  tne  beam  splits  into  2x  -l  1  separate  streams,  beau- tifully  demonstrating  the 
 quantization  of  angular  momenliim.  (TI  you  use  silver atoms,  f'or  example,  all  the  
inner  electrons  are  paired,  in  such  a  way  that  their spin  and  orbital  angular  momenta  
cancel.  The  net  spin  is  simply  that  of  the outermost—unpaired—electron,  so  in  this  case 
 s  ——  1/2,  and  the  beam  splits in two.)
Now,  that  argument  was  purely  clas.siccil,  up  to  the  very  final  step;  “force” nas  no  
piace  in  a  proper  quantum  caicuiation,  am   you  mignt  tnereiore  pieier

perspective of a rcfercncc frame that more:s along with the beam. In this frame the Hamiltonian  
starts out  zero,  turns  on for  a time  T  (as the particle  passes  through thc magnet),  and  
then turns off  again:


0,                           for f      0,
H{t)         —g(Bo+ az)S  ,    for 0     t  <  T,
0,                           for t      T.

[4.17


(I  ignore  the  pesky  x  component  of  B,  which—for  reasons  indicated  above—is irrele  dnt  
tO  the  problem.)  Suppose  the  atom  has  spin  1/2,  and  starts  out  in  the state
2 (i)  — app    +   bye,      for f  <  0.

"7This argument  follows L. Ballentinc  (footnote  26) Section  9.1.


Section 4.4,-  Spin        183





where (from Equation  4.158)



and  hence it emerges in the state







h
2:'







[4.172)

X {t)      (we'*‘D°’2J+)  e'"*“’2’  +   be  '*’  B° ²/    ) e     "‘*'‘'2",          [4.173]
(for  I        T)    The  two  terms  now  carry  momentum   im   the         r14r»t'r c   finn  
Fort no
tion 3.32);  the spin-up  component  has  momentum
av Th
p    '         2  :
and  it  moves  in  the  plus-7.  direction,  the  spin-down  component   has  the  oppo- site  
momentum,  and  it  moves  in  the  minus-z  direction.  Thus  the  beam  splits in  two,  as  
before.  (Note  that  Equation  4.174  is consistent  with  the  earlier  result (Equation  4.170), 
for in this case  S,  —— ñ/2,  and  p   -=  F.-T.)
The Stern-Gerlach  experiment  has played  an important role in the philosophy of  quantum  
mechanics,  where  it  serves  both  as the  prototype  for the preparation

measurement. We tend casually to assume that the initial  state of a system is Roan (the 
Schrodinger  equation  tells us how  it subsequently  evolves)—but  it is natural o w  n    r   o   
 you  ge  a syse     no  a  par  cu        a    in          r    pace

unpolarized beam through  a Stem-Gerlach  magnet,  and select the outgoing  stream you  are  
interested  in  (closing  off  the  others  with  suitable  baffles  and  shutters).

it  through  a Stern-Gerlach  apparatus,  and  record  which  bin  it  lands  in.  I do  not claim 
that this is always the most pi‘actical  way to do the job, but it is conceptually very  clean,  
and hence  a  useful  context  iii which to  explore  the  problems  of  state





(a)  If  you  measured  the  component  of  spin  angular  momentum  along  the  x
direction,  at time f,  what is the probability  that  you  woiild  get  Hi:/2?

184         Chapter 4    Quantum Mechanics in "I hree Dimensions

(b)  Same question,  but for the  y •oomponent.
(c)  Same. for the z component.





Bz  and      are constants.

(a)  Construct  the Hamiltonian  matrix for this  system.
(b)  The  electron  starts  out  (at  i  =  0)  in  the  spin-up  state  with  respect  to  the 
x-axis (that is: 2 (0)  — y+ ’). Determine 2 (r) at any subsequent time. Beware. This  is  a  
time-dependent  Hamiltonian,  so  you  cannot  get  y (r)  in the  usual way from  stationary  
states. Fortunately,  in this case  you  can solve the time- dependent Schrodinger  equation  
(Equation  4.162) directly.

(c)  Find  the  probability  of  getting  —ft/2,  if  you  measu£ti  i-x
Answer:

sin”         )

What is the minimum  field (Bz) required  to force a complete flip in  Sz?


4.4.3  Addition of Angular Morrienta
Suppose now  that  we have two  spin-1/2  particles—for  example,  the electron and the proton in 
the ground state"' of hydrogen. Each can have spin up or spin down, so there are four  
possibilities in all:"’

[4.175]

where the first arrow  refers to the electron  and the second to the proton. Que.siren:
What is the total  angular  momentum  of  the atom? Let

[4.176]

"  1 put them in the gmund  state so there won't be any orbital  angular momcntum  to woriy about.
-”  Mr›rr. pre.wisely,  each  particle  is  in  a  lizieor    omUiinotion   of’  spin  up  and  
spin  down,  and  the composite  system  is  in  ‹t  linear c'oiii,biiioi/crt  of   the four  
states  listed,




J"                             Each  of  these  Your  composite  states  is  an  eigenstate  of  
S,—the  z  components

S¿#lK2—     +      (2))xi  x    —  (S,     Al )J2  +   X1(s(2)


.        .          q„                 .  .                gg,               ..  ..
elegant, but it does the job). So m  (the quantum  number for the composite  system)
is just mt + •'2:



.1.4: m—0:


At  first  glance,  tnis  doesn‘t  look  right:  m  is  supposed  to  advance in  integer

with iu  =  0. One way to untangle  this problem is to apply  the lowering  operator,
So —— SP'  +  S “’  to the state    J,  using Equation  4.146:




Evidently  the three states with .i  — 1 are (in the notation  |s m)):



|1 0}     —                                                                          14.177]



Problem 4.34(a).)  This  is called  the  triplet  combination,  for  the  obvious  reason. 
Meanwhile,  the orthogonal  state with m =  0 carries .s =  0:



00)—   (}J  — }})         .s =   0  (singlet).
[4.178]


(If  you  apply  the  raising  or  lowei5ng  operator  to  this  state,  you'll  get  zero. See

18a›         Chattier 4    Cluantum  Mechanics in Three Dimensions

1 claim,  then,  that the combination  of  two spin-1/2 particles  can carry  a total

uration. To confirm  this, I need to prove that the  triplet states are eigenvectors  of 5²  with  
eigenvalue  2/i², and  the  singlet is an  eigenvector  of  S    with  eigenvalue

s2  =  (s(1)+ s 2')  - (s       +   s(2 )     ;J(1))2+  (J(2))2+   2s(’-   S 2*.      [4.179)
Using  Equations  4.141 and 4.147,  we have



/i            ñ                 i/i             —I                   ñ            —i: 2            
2                 2               2           +     2              2
g2
4
Similarly,
s"’  s


It follows  that





s("   s(2);o

ñ2   1
(2       —  /\    -I-2 /\    —    })   —   4     0},           [4 180]


|0 0).        [4.181]

Returning  to Equation  4.179 (and usnJg Equation  4.142), we conclude  that


S  |1 0             4         4  “   2 4      |1 0)
en  |. i.  .u..}  is  inu.cc‹i.  an  cigcnsiaie  or  na  .wit.n  eigcnvai.uc  zna ,  ant:i

s'-|o o) =      4        4      2

[4.182]




[4.183]


that  |1 I )  and  |1 —1)  are  eigcnstates  of  5²,  with  the  appropriate  eigenvalue—see
Problem  4.34(c).)


Section 4.4:  $pin        187

What  we have just done (combining  spin 1/2 with  spin 1/2  to get spin 1  and spin  0) is the 
simplest  example  of  a larger  problem:  If  you  combine  spin st  with spin sz, what total 
spins s  can  you  get?    The answer     is that  you get every spin






aligned  parallel  to one  another,  and'the lowest  occurs’ when  they’ are antiparallel.) For 
example,  if you  package  together a particle of  spin 3/2 with  a particle of spin 2, you could 
get a total spin of 7/2, 5/2, 3/2, or 1/2, depending on the configuration. Another example: If a 
hydrogen atom is in the state  fp    , the net angular momen- triiof  the electron  (spin  plus  
orbital)  is 1 -1- 1/2    or f  — 1/2; I   you  now  throw  in spin of  the proton, the atom’s  
total  angular  momentum  quantum  number is 1     1,
/, or  I  — 1  (and    can be achieved  in  two distinct  ways,  depending  on  whether  the
electron  alone is in the 1 +  1/2    configuration  ur the I — 1/2    configuration).
The combined  state  |.v in)  with  total spin  s  and  z-component  m  will be some


[4.185]


(because the z components  add, the only  composite  states that contribute  are those for  which  
m   +    •2  =   itt).  Equations  4.177  and  4.178  arc  special  cases  of  this general  form,  
with  st  —   2  =  1/2    (I used the  informal  notation      =  |   2),
ˡ       The .constants  C j      ,z  are called Clebsch-Gordan coefficients.  A few of  the 
simplest  cases are listed in Table 4.8.42  For example,  the shaded column of the 2 x  1 table  
tells us  that



In particular, if two particles (of spin 2 and spin 1) are at rest in a box, and the total
spin is  3,  and  its  z  component  is 0, then  a  measurement  of  Sol’  could  return  the

our
a   e         i    pr    a
wi    pro  a  my           or                 pro  a  ily

40a  say   spins,  for  simplicity,  but  either   one  (or  bDth)  could  }ust   as  Well  be  
orbital   angular momentum  (for  which,  however,.  we  would  use  the  letter 1,).
o     p     f y  u    us                               va    e        t    ee     r    st    ce     
 au  e        c                 j Bernard  Din, and  Frar:ck Laloc,  (juan/utit  Mechanics, (Wiley, 
 New  York, 1977),  Vol. 2, Chapter  X.
-The general  formula  is derived in  Anno  Buliin,  Quantum. Mechanics.  Foundnhons  anzf  Appli-
c.ation,s, 2nd  ed., (Springer,  1986), p. 172.

TABLE 4.B:     Clebsch-Gordan coeffieients.  (A square root sign is understood for

1/2




x1/2

/2










1//3




1/5). Noñce that the probabilities add up to 1 (the sum of the squares of any column on the 
Clebsch-Gordan table is 1).
These tables also work the other  way  around.

4.186


example,  the shaded  rnw  vn the 3/2 x 1 table tells us that





If  you  put  particles  of  spin  3/2  and  spin  1  in  the  box,  and  you  know  that  the
first  has      L  —  1/2    and  the  second  has  m2        0  (so  m  is  necessarily  1/2),  
and on  measure  the  roin/      in,  s     ou  could  q•et  5/2   with    robabilit    3/5         
  /2 (with  probability  1/15), or 1/2  (with  probability  1/3).  Again,  the sum of  the prob- 
res  is         e  sum  o      e squares  o   eac    row  on               sc           an

If  you think  this is starting to sound like mystical numerology, I don't blame you.  We  will  
not  be  using  the  Clebsch-Gordan  tables  much  in  the  rest  of  the

you  encounter  them  later  on.  In  a  mathematical  sense  this  is  all  applied  group 
theory—what  we are talking about is the decomposition  of  thee direct  product  of



Section 4.4.  S pin        189

•                                    two irreauciDie represenmrions of  ifie rotation group into a 
aireci sum of irrenucioie
renréar ntntinns    vrsii  can   minute  1’hnt   In  immrexs  vnnr frir ndx3





(a)   Apply  So  to  |1 0} (Equation  4.177), and confirm that you  get     2fi|1 —1). fb)   Apply  
S+  to 10 0)  (Equation 4.178), and confitm that you set zero.
Show  that  !1 1 \  and  |1  —1     /+   »                >>*  •••   •;   •   •*•*••        <2   
•••***  **•
appropriate  eigenvalue.



(s        as  the  proton  or  neutron);  two  quarks  (or  more  precisely  a  quark  and  an 
antiquark) bind together to make a meson (such as the pion or the kaon). Assume

la)  What  spins  are possible for baryons?
(b)  What  spine  are possible for mesons?



(a)   A  particle  of  spin  1   and  a  particle  of  spin  2  are  at  rest  in  a  configuration
rich  thot  the  tnta1  min  is  3,  and  iix  z  romy›onent  is  h   V   ynii  mr.asiired  the
¿  component  of  the  angular  momentum  of  the  spin-2  particle,  what  values might  you  get, 
and  what is the probability  of  each  one?
(b)   An electron  with spin down is in the state f5i0   f the hydrogen  atom. If  you

(not  including  the proton  spin),  what  values  might  you  get, and  what is the probability  
of each?



Generalize  your result to show  that



C'nmrnrat   Because  .$$     does  not commute  with  .$*   we cannot  hope to  find  states
that  are  simultaneous  eigenvectors  of  both. In  order to form  eigenstates  of  S²  we

190          Clsffer 4    Quantum Mechanics in Three Dimensions

need lineur combinations  of eigenstates of S,”. This is precisely: what the Clebsch- Jordan 
coetiicients  (in equation   .i 6Z j €tO for us. On tne otner nans, it sorrows  oy
rihuin4ss  infr rr•ncr• frnm  F'•quotinn  d  4 97    thot fho  rrfm  Si  ")     V       rfriev  
rnmvriute  with
S², which is a special  case of  something we already  knew  (see Equation  4.103).


FURTHER PROBLEMS FOR CHAPTER  4

Problem 4.38  Consider  the  three-dimens*onal  harmonic  oscillator,  for  which the potential is
V(r)                                                                   (4.188]

(a)  Show  that  separation  of  variables  in  cartesian  coordinates  turns  this  into three  
one-dimensional  oscillators,  and  exploit  yotir  knowledge  of  the  latter to determine the 
allowed energies. Anewer.

[4.189]

{b)   Determine  the degeneracy  d{n) Of  Ez.



Problem 4.39  Because the three-dimensional harmonic oscillator  potential (Equa- tion 4.188)  is 
spherically  symmetric,  the Schrfidinger  equation  can  be handled  by separanon  or  variaoies  
in  spnericat  cooroinaies,  as  weir  as canesian  cooi oinaies. Use 1:he power series method to 
solve the radial equation. Find the recursion formula for the coefficients, and determine the 
allowed energies. Check your answer against Equation  4.189.


s +Prob1em  4.40

(a)   Prove the three-dimensional  virial theorem:

[4.190]

ffor stationary  states).  find:  Refer to Problem  3.31.
(h)   Apply  the virial  theorem to the case of  hydrogen,  and show that

[4.191]

further Problems   or Chapter 4         191

(c)   Apply  the virial theorem  to the three-dimensional harmonic  oscillator  (Prob-


[4,192]


•      Problem 4.41  [Attempt  this  problem  only  if  you  are  familiar  with  vector  cal- 
culus.]  Define  the  (three-dimensional)  probability  current  by  generalization  of rrooiem  i. 
i4.
[4.193]

(a)   Show that I  satisfies  the continuity  equation

[4.194]

which  expresses  local  conservation  of  probability.  It  follows  (from  the divergence  
theorem)  that
{                     d    [

where V is a (fixcd) volume and ‹S is its boundarv surface. In words: The flow of probability  out 
through  the surface is eqrial to the decrease in probability of  finding the particle in the 
volume.
{b)   Find  I  for  hydrogen  in  the  state  n — 2,  I —  1,  ni      1.  Answer.



(c)   If  we interpret  mJ as the flow of  mazs, the angular  momentum is

L — m  J (r x J) d³r.

Use this to calculate  L,, for the state 42    , and comment on the result.


*    +Prob1em 4.42  The (time independent) momentum  space wave function  in three dimensions is 
defined  by the natural generalization of Equation  3.54:

(4.196]






(a)   1-ind  the  momentum  space  wave  function  for  the  ground  state  of  hydrogen

the direction  of p. Do the 9 integral first. Answer:

2 ’                          [4.197]

n( e)     h  ck     a  Q(p)  is         ed
lc)  Use Q(p) to calculate  (y"), in the ground  state of  hydrogen.
(d)  What  is  the  expectation  value  of  the  kinetic  energy  in  this  state?  Express your  
answer  as  a multiple  of  E    and  check  that  iL is  consistent  with  the virial theorem  
(Equation 4.191).

Problem

I  =   2,  m  —  1.  Express  your  answer  as  a  function  of  r,  9,  Q,  and  a  (the Bohr 
radlius) only—no other variables (p, z, etc.) or functions {Y, v, etc.), or constants (A,  o. 
etc.), or derivatives, allowed (n is okay, and e, and 2, etc.).
teec   t  at  t   s                 so   i   prop  r y  no        z        y tc       n   o  t    e



and negative) is the result finite† Problem 4.44
Express  your answer as a function of  the spherical  coordinates r, 0,  and $.
(b)  Find the expectation value of r in this state. (As always, look up any nontrivial integrals.)

(c)  If  you  could  somehow  measure  the observable  xL
f-   2   an atom in  this
state,  what  value  (or  values)  could  you  get,  and  what is  the  probability  of


Problem 4.45  What is the probability that an electron in the ground state of hydro- gen will be 
found inside the nucleus?
(a)  First calculate the exact  answer, assuming the wave function (Equation 4,80) is correct all 
the way down to r  =  0. Let b be the radius of the nucleus.


MTtheY  PYOblems [or Chapter 4        193


show  that the lowest-order  term is the cubic:  P      (4/3)(b/u)³. This should be a suitable 
approximation, provided  that  b      a  (which it is).
lc)   Alternatively,  we  might  assume  that   f(r)  is  essentially  constant  over  the

ct the same answer this wa
(d)   Use b      10   15   m and o      0.5 x 10*" m to get a numerical  estimate  for P. Roughly  
speaking,  this represents  the  “traction  of  its  time  that  the  electron spends inside  the 
nucleus.”

Problem 4.46

the radial  wave function  takes the form



a:nd determine  the normalization  constant  Nz  by direct integration.
(b)   Calculate  (r)  and  (r“)  for states of the  form  I..(..—1)-r.
(c)   Show  that  the  “uncertainty”  in  r          is  (r)/    2       1 for  such  states.  Note 
that the fractional  spread  in r  decreases,  with increasing  n  (in this sense the system 
“begins to look classical,” with identifiable  circular “orbits,” for large n). Sketch the radial  
wave functions for several values of n,  to illustrate  this point.

spr      e    4   7  C  in  i  enet                      es      Accar   ng  to     e  Rydb   g  
fru a

by  the principal  quantum  numbers  of  the initial  and  final  states. Find  two distinct pairs 
(n, , nJ } that yield the same  L. For example, (6851, 6409} and (15283, 11687)


Problem 4.48  Consider  the observables  A — x²  and  B  —  L  .
(a)   Construct the  uncertainty  principle for  oz oB.
(b)   Evaluate    B  N  the hydrogen  state  Jg  „.
c         a         y  u c  n       e a    u       y    n     s s a


43

194          Chapter 4     Guantnm Mechanics  in ThTee  Dimensions


Problem 4.49  An electron is in the spin state
x =  A   1 — 2i
(a)   Determine  the constant  A by  normalizing  x-
(b)   If you measured  S-  on  this  electron,  what values  could  you get, and  what is
the probability  of  each? What  is the expectation  value  of  S  ?
(c)   If  you  measured  S    on this clectron,  what  valuer  could  you  get, and  what is
the probability  of each? What is the expectation  value of  Sq?
(d)   If  you  measured  S y  On this electron,  what  values could  you  poet, and what  is the 
probability  of  each? What is the expectation  value of  S  .?

+Frob1eni 4.50  Suppose two spin-1/2 particles are known to be in the ringlet config- uration 
(Equation  4.178). Let S     be the component of the spin angular momentum of  particle  number  1 
in the  direction  defined  by  the unit  vector  n.  Similarly,  let S ²’ be the component  of 2’s 
angular  momentum in the direction b. Show  that

[4.    8]

where fi  is the angle betweenñ    and  b.

+Problem 4.51
(a)  Work  out  the Clebsch-Gordan coefficients  for the case *i  =  1/2, *2 =   •"y-
thing.  Hint,’  You're looking for the coefficients  A and  B  in
1  1                     l )) +  B  2
such  that  \s in) .is  an eigenstate  of  S². Use  the  method  of  Equations  4.179 throiigh 
4.182. If you can't figure out what 5  ²’ (for instance) does to |  2 »   1, refer back  to 
Equation  4.136 and  the line before Equation  4.147. Answer .

A   —      ’2  “ '+ +  ›/ 2 ,’   B    +     s
252 +  1








always, the basis of eigenstates of 5,). Solve the characteristic equation to determine the 
eigenvalues  of Sq.

ro   e         3     o    out t      pin    a   ce    or    b   ary   p       g  neral      g  p n 
1/2





0       0       s — 2







0    0

0    0    0


0        —ib





0
where



+Problem 4.54  Work  out  the  normalization  factor for  the  spherical  harmonics,  as follows. 
From Section 4.1.2  we know that


the  problem  is  to  determine  the  factor  B"  (which  I  quoted,  but  did  not  derive,


196          Chapter  4     Quantum Mechanics  in Three  Dimensions

relation .giving  B ’“'   in terms of  B/'. Solve it by  induction  on m  to  get  B    up to an 
overall constant, C(I). Finally, use the result of Problem  4.22 to fix the constant. You  may  
find  the  following  formula  for  the  derivative  of  an associated  Legendre


    '    ——    1       2 pt+     — m.x P ".                      [4.199]


Prnfiiem  4.11  The c1ectrnn  \n  a  hyrlrn   on  atnm  nccng\cs  the  cnmhincr!  skin  anrt
position state


ang        momen




spin
angu ar momentum.
(e)  If  you  measured  I   ,  what  values might  you get, and  what is the  probability

ame
(g)  If  you  measured  the  position  of  the  particle,  what  is  the  pi obability  density

(h)   E you  measured  both the ‹  component  of thc spin and  the distancc from the origin  (note  
that  these  are  compatible  observables),  what  is  the  probability density for finding  the 
particle  with  spin  up and  at radius  r1


v      Fcoblcuz 4.56





(where  p  is  an arbitrary  angle).  For  this  reason,  L,-/ti  is called  the  gener- ator  of  
rotations  about  the  z-axis.  find:  Use  Equation  4.129,  and  refer  to Problem  3.39.




More generally,  L-   h Jh ix the generator of rotationx about the direction ñ e sense              
                                               roug   ang
hand  sense)  ahout  the axis n. In  the case of  spin, the generator  of rotations is S   n/ñ. In 
particular, for spin 1/2



tells us how .spinors  rotate.
(b)  Construct  the (2 x 2) matrix  representing  rotation  by 180°  about  the x-axis. and  show  
that  it  converts  “spin  up”  (x+) into  “spin  down”  (2s),  as  you would expect.
c)  Construct the matrix represenung rotation by 90“ about the y-axis, and check


answer is not ouite what you expectCd, discuss its implications.

+  i(n   w) sin(p                      [4.201]


r     e                 c     n      e  ta   co      ut    on  re a  ons   or    ng     r     o   
entu

orbital  angular  momentum  only  the  integer  values  occur.  There  must  be  some
extra  constraint  in the specific form L =  r x p that excludes half-integer  values.⁴’ say, if  
we're talking about hydrogen),  and define the operators
1




(a)  Verify  that  [qi    21  —  ml.    P2l       0;  [q; , yJ]  =   Liz. P2l '      tit. Thus  the 
q's  and the  p’s satisfy  the canonical commutation  relations for position  and

(b)  Show that

2n2            2A

s          e      s   as          an argument   n        e      e             t

198          Chapter 4        .uantum Mechanics  in T'iree:Dimensions


oscillator  with mass m  — ñ/n' and frequency
(d)   We know  that  the  eigenvalues  of  the  harmonic  oscillator  Hamiltonian  are (n +  
1/2)fim. where n =  0, 1, 2, ...    (In the algebraic theory of Section  2.3.1

relations). ITse this to conclude that the eigenvalues  of  f.,  must be integers.



is,  eqttaliy  in  the  expression    s,   s„      (h/2) |(S,) |), for  a  particle  o1 spin  1/2  
in the generic state (Equation  4.139). Answer:  With no loss of generality we can pick a  to be 
real; then  the  condition  for  minimum  uncertainty  is  that  b is  either  pure real or else  
pure imaginary.


+Prob1cm 4.s9  In  classical  clectrodynamics  the  force  on  a  particle  of  charge  q moving  
with  velocity  v through  electric  and  magnetic fields E  and B is given  by the Lorentz force 
law:
F — q(EI    v x  B).                                       {4.202]

This lorce cannot be expressed as the gradient of a scalar potential energy function, and therefore 
 the Schrddinger  equation  in its original form (Equation 1.1)  cannot accoriainodate it, But  in 
the more  sophisticated  form

4.203

there is no problem;  the classical Hami1tonian‘5  is

[4.204]

where  A  is  the  vector  potential  (B  —  W  x  A)  and  p  is  the  scalar  potential  (E
—Hy  — dA/ Or),  so  the  Schrodinger  equation  (making  the  canonical  substitution
p —+  (ft/ i)H) becomes



ih at    —
df
1      h                2
2m     i
[4.20.5]
"Sec,  for  example,.  H. Goldstein,  C, P: Poole,  arid  J. L. Safko,  CU.ssic‹tl  Men:/tonics,  
3rd  ed.,
(Prentice  Hall,  Upper Saddle River,  NJ, 20t)2),  page 342,





d(r) dt
(b)   As always (see Equation  1.32)  we  identify  d      /dt  with  (v}.  Show  that


m  dt

=  q(E) -J-   '    ((p x B — B x p)) —  '    ((A x B)}.          [4.207]
2m                                    m

(c)   In  particular,  if  the fields E  and  B are itniJ‘orm  over the volume of  the  wave
r  •ket, show fhat

d(   )
dt
q(E  -J— (v)  x  B),                                   [4.208]

so the expectation, vulue  o? (e) moves  according  to .the Lorentz  force law, as
rew  u    e  pe                    ie          eo em         n


s *   Problem 4.60  [Reter  to Problem 4.59 for background.]  Suppose

(xy      yr),     and     ›  =  ^i“.

where  Bq and  K  are constantx.


in      e       we   ener   es            p        e         a  s      an   c       e      in     e 
e


,n =0,l,       [4.209]


quantum analog to cyclotron motion; mt  is the classical cyclotron frequency, and it's a free 
particle in the z direction. The allowed  energies,  (n      ›)£«l. are called Landau  Levels."


+Prob1em 4.61  [Refer to Problem  4.59 for background.] In classical electrodynam- are the  fields, 
E and  B.
4    For further discu,ssion  see Ballentine  (1'oomote  26) Section  11.3.



200           CbsQter 4     Quantum Mechanics  in Three Dimensions

a)  Show  that  the potentials

[4.210]

(where  A  is an  arbitrary  real function  of  position  and  time)  yield  the  same fields as p 
and A. Equation  4.210 is called  a gauge tramformation, and the theory  is said  to be gauge 
invariant.

interest  to know  whether  the theory remains  gauge invariant.  Show that

[4.211]

satisfies the Schrddinger  equation f4.205)  with the gauge-transformed poten- tials ‹p' and A'. 
Since W' differs from  W only by a phase Jrirfor, it represents the  same  physical  state,"  and  
the  theory  is  gauge  invariant  (see. Section
10.2.3 for further dilscussion).





















4*That  is  to  say,  (r),  J(T) fdt,  etc.  are  unchanged.  Because  A   depends  on  position,  
(p)  (with  p rcpresented  by  the  operator   (ñ / i) 4)   does   change,   but  as  we  found  in 
 Equation  4.206,   p  does  not represent   the  mechanical  momentum  (mv)  in  this  context   
(in   lagrangian   mechanics   it  is  so-called canonical momentum),







CHAPTER I

IDENTICAL PARTICLES




5.I   TWO-PARTICLE SYSTEMS
For  a  single  particle,  T(r, /)  is  a  function  of  the  spatial  coordinates,  r,  and  the 
time,  r  (we'll ignore  spin,  for  the moment).  The  state of  a  two-particle  system  is a  
function  of  the  coordinates  of  particle  one  (rJ),  the coordinates  of  particle  two (<2).  
nd the time:
T(rt , r2, r).
Its time evolution  is determined  (as always) by the Schmidinger  equation:


HW,

where  H  is the Hamiltonian  for  the whole system:
[5.2)


1       2mp
₂ + 8(•i. •«, r)                   I^ nl
(the  subscript  on  W  indicates  differentiation  with  respect  to  fhe  coordinates  of 
particle 1  or  particle  2,  as the case  may  be).  The  statistical  interpretation  carries 
over in the obvious way:

[5.4]
is  the  probability  of  finding  particle  1  in the  volume  d3rt  and  particle  2 in  the 
volume d  <2: evidently  'P  must be normalized in such a way  that

[5.5]

201






F  r  It   e ind  pendent  p   ent a     we    bt   n     c     p ete   et    f   o ut   ns  by

(r  , r2)«
where  the  spatial  wave  function  (J)   satisfies  the  time-independent Schrddinger equation:


and  E  is the  total  energy  of  the system.

+Problcm  5.1  Typically,  the  interaction  potential  depends  only  on  the  vector  r
•i  — r   between  the two particles. In that case the Schrodinger  equation separates,
if  we change variables from r1. rz to r  and R     (min  + 't'2r2)/£mi + m2) (the

(a)  Show that ri  — R +  (y/mt)r, r2 -  R  —  (y/mg)r, and 9i   — (p/r»z)9x  +
r›    2 —  (   /    ]) 9x  — 4,-. where





in


2(< 1 +      2)
(c)  Separate the variables, letting    (R, r) = Jp(R)J,-(r). Note that Jp   satisfies e  one p     
c e    c   o       e   equ  t on     i     t  e              a                   2    n
Schrodinger  equation  with  the  reduc'ed  mass  in  place of  m, potential  V(r),
and energy ñ, . The total energy is the sum: £  =  €// + E-r  What this tells us
is that the center of  mass moyes  like a free particle,  and the  relative  motion (that is, the 
motion of  particle 2 with respect  to particle 1)  is the same as if we had a  single  particle  
with the  reduced  mass,  subject  to  the  potential  V. Exactly  the  same  decomposition  occurs 
 in  classical  mechanics;’  it  redulces fhf  lW*-hody  rTGblem  to an  equivalent  one-holy  
problem



l See, for example,  Jerry  B. Marion  and Stephen  T. Thornton.  Classical  Dynamics i¿(Particles  
   ', and  Systeni.s, 4th ed., Saunders, Fort Worth, TX (1995),  Section  8.2.

Section 5.1:  Two-l?article S ysterns         203


Problem 5.2  In view of Problem 5.1, we can correct for the motion of the nucleus in hydrogen  by 
simply  replacing  the .electron  mass  with the reduced  mass.
(a)   Find  (to  two  significant  digits)  the  percent  error  in  the  binding  energy  of

(b)   Find  the separation  in wavelength  between  the  red  Balmer  lines  (n  —  3   ›
n =  2  for h         en and  deuteñum.
(c)  Find  the binding energy  of  positronium  (in which the proton is replaced by a positron     
positrons have the same mass as electrons, but opposite charge).
(d)   Suppose  you wanted to confirm the existence of muonic hydrogen, in which the electron  is 
replaced  by  a muon (same charge,  but  206.77  times heavier). Where  (i.e.,  at  what  
wavelength)  would  you  look  for  the  “Lyman-a”  line (n  —  2 —› ri  =  1)?


Problem 5.3  Chlorine  has two naturally  occurring  isotopes,  Cl³’  and Cl³’.  Show that the 
vibrational  spectrum of HCP should consist of closely spaced doublets, with a splitting  given  by 
 Av      7.51 x  10  4 r,  wherc  v  is the frcquency  of  the emitted
photon.  flint:  Think  of  it  as  a  harmonic  oscillator,  with  in         k     , wherc  p  is 
the reduced  mass (Equation  5.8) and  k  is presumably  the same for both isotopes.


1 1 1  Rnxnns anrl Fcrrnians

(z/. fRemember: I'm  ignoring spin. for the moment.) In that case Jfr    , rt)   is a
simple  prod,uct.
(r  , r2J =  pa(r  )J¿(r2).                                   [5.91
Of course, this assumes that we can tell the particles  apart—otherwise it wouldn't make any sense 
to claim that number 1 is in state Jq  and number 2 is in state lb“ all we could  say is that one  
of them is in the statC 1*a  and the other is in state      , but we wouldn't know which is which. 
If we were talking cI,assical  mechanics  this would be a silly objection: You can o/ways tell the 
particles apart, in principle—just

2lt is emphatically  nr›f  true  that every  tWo-particle  wave function is a product of two 
one-particle wave functions.  There  exist  so-called entangled  states that cannot  bc decomposed  
this way. However: If  particle  1  is  in  state  n  and  particle  2 is  in state  b,  r/i‹n  the 
 two-particlc  statc  is  a product.  I  know what..you’re  thinking:  “How  could particle  1  not 
 be in s‹›inc  stnte,  and particle  2  in  some  other state?” The  classic  example  is  the  
singlet  spin  configurntion  (Equation  4.178)—I  can't  tell  you  the  state  of particle  1  by 
 itself,  because  it is  “entanglcd”  (Schriidingcr's  lovely  word)  with  the  state  of 
particle  2. 11‘ 2  is measured,  and found  to be spin  up, then  1  is spin .dnwn,  but  if 2 is 
spin  down,  then  1  is spin up.



204                ter

paint  one of  them red  and  the other  one blrie; or stamp  identification numbers  on

the  situation  is fundamentally  different:  You  can't  paint  an electron  red,  or  pin  a 
label  on  it,  and  a  detective's  observations  will  inevitably  and  unpredictably  alter

fact is, all electrons are utterly identir.o.1,  in a way  that no two classical  olijects can ever 
be. It's  not just that  we  don't  happen to know  which electron  is  which; God doesn't know  
which is which,  because there  is xo xuch thing  as “this” electron,  or “that” electron;  all  we 
 can legitimately  speak about is “an” electron.
Quantum  mcchanics  neatly  accommodates  the  existence  of  particles  that  are 
indistinguishable  iii  princiyle:  We  simply  construct  a  wave  function  that  is  non- 
c‹rinmitfuf   as  to  which  particle  is  in  which  state.  There  are  actually  lino  ways  to 
do it:
[5.10]

Thus  the thcory  admits  two kinds of idcntical  particlcs:  bosons, for which wc usc the plus 
sign, and fermions, for which we use the minus sign. Photons and mesons are bosons;  protons and  
electrons  are fermions. It so happens  that


ai1  particles  with integer  spin  are bnsons, and all particles  with hal{integer  spin are 
fermions.
5.iij

This connection  between spin and statistics (as we shall see, bosons  and fermions have  quite  
different  statistical  properties)  can  be  prove6f   in  relatii›istic  quantum mechanics;  in 
the  nonrelativistic theory it is taken as an axiom."

trons)  cannot  occupy the snme  state. For if  J,   =  Jr.   then



and  we are left with  no wave function  at all.⁴ This is the famous Pauli exclusion principle. It 
is not (as you may have been led to believe) a weird ad hoc assumption applying  only  to  
electrons,  but  rather  a  consequence  of  the rules for constructing two-particle  wave 
functions,  applying  to nff  identical fermions.
I  assumed,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  that  one  particle  was  in  the  state  Jg
and  the  other  in  state  ›fb.  but  there  is  a  more  general  (and  more  sophisticated)

It  seems  bizarrc  that  relativity  should  have  anything  to  do  with  it,  and  thcrc  has  
been  a  lot of  discussion  recently  as  to  whether  it  might  be  l•••Sible  to  prove  the  
spin-statisucs  connection  in other  ( Ampler)  ways. See,  for exam} lc,  Rubert C. .Hilborn,  
Atn. J. Phys. 63,  298  (1993);  lair Duck and
E. C. G. .SuJarshan,  Pao./i and they Spin-Statistics Theorem, World Scientific,  Singapore  
(1997).
4I’m  still  leaving  out  the spin,  don't 1orget—if  this  bothers  you  (alter  all, a spinless  
fermion is  a contradic•tJun  in  terms),  assume  they're in  the .tame  spin  sl.ate. 1’11  
incorporate  spin  explicitly  in  a moment.

Suction 5.1:  Two-P‹irficle  S ystem›         205

way  to  formulate  the  problem.  Let  us  define  the exchange  operator,  P,  which interchanges 
 the two particles:
Pf(r  , r2) =  f(r2. rJ).                                    [5.12]
Clearly,  P² = 1, and it follows (prove it for yourself) that the eigenvalues of  P are
1. Now, if  the  two particles  are identical,  the Hamiltonian  must  treat  them the sane: mt  =  
m2 and  Y(•i,  2)'     Y(›2. ri). It follows that P and H  are compatible observables,
(P, HI = 0,                                             [5.13]
and hence we can find a complete set of functions that are simultaneous eigenstates of  both.  That 
 is  to  say,  we can  find  solutions  to  the  Schrodinger  equation  that are  either  symmetric 
 (eigenvalue  +1)  or  antisymmetric  (eigenvalue  —1)  under exchange:

[5.14]

Moreover, if a system starts out in such a state, it will remain in such a state. The new law (I'll 
call it the  symmetrization requirement) is that for idenñcal particles the  wave  function  is  
not  merely  allowed,  but  required   to  satisfy  Equation  5.14, with the plus sign for bosons. 
and the minus sign for fermions.5 This is the genernl statement,  of which  Equation 5.10 is a 
special case.

Example 5.1    Suppose we have two noninteracting—they pass right through  one

mass m. in the  infinitc  square  well  fsection  2.2). The  one-particle  states are




Al in state nt  and #2 in state •2. the composite wave function is a simple product:


*It  is  sometimes  suggested  that  the  symmGtriZation  requirement  (Equation  5.14)  is  forced 
  by thc  fact  that   P  ‹ind  If   commute.   This  is  false:  It  is  perfectly  possible  to  
imagine  a  system  of  two distinguishable  particles  (say,  an electron  and  a positron) for 
which the Hamiltonian  is symmetric,  and yet  there  is  no  requirement   that  the  wave  
function  be  symmetric  (or  antisymmetric).  But    identical. particles  Ave    to occupy  
symmetric  or antisymmetric  states,  and  this  is  a completely  new  fundamental fn›r —on a.par, 
 logically,  with Schriiclinger's equation  and the st‹atistical  interpretation. Of  course,  
there didn't  /ieve  to  be  any  such  things  as  identical  particles;  it  could  have  been  
that  every  single  particle in  nature  was  distinguishable  from  every  other one.  Quantum  
mechanics  allows  for  the  posst.bil,ity  of’ identical  particles,   and  nature  (being   lazy) 
 seized  the  opportunity.   (But  I'm   not  complaining—this makes  matters  enormously  
simpler!)






for  example,  the ground state is    •



t  e     st e     ted st  t   i     ou   y     g  nerat



4zi =  -  sin(2vz  /a) sin(vxt/n),

but  the first excited  state is nondegenerate:



fstill with .energy  SK). And if the particles are identical  fermion.‹, there is no .state with 
energy 2J,   the ground  state is



and its energy  is 5A.


Problem 5.4
(a)  If  Jq  and  ›th  are orthogonal,  and both normalized,  what is the constant  A in Equation   
 .10?

mo                                             )  If              b  (an   it is
a    ed)  what      A   (T      ca e  o   c    rse  o






infinite souare well. Verify that the fermion around state eiven in Example .5.1 is an 
eigenfunction  of  H,  with the appropriate  eigenvalue.
(b)   Find  the  next  two  excited  states  (beyond  the  ones  in Example  5.1)     wave unctions 
         ner   es      o  e  c   o           ree case           ng       a   e     entica


Section 5.1.-  Two-Pnrficfe  S ystgms         207
5.1,2  Exchange Forces
To give you some sense of what the symmetrization requirement  actually does, I'm going  to work  
out  a  simple  one-dimensional example.  Suppose  one  particle  is in state  Jq(a),  and  the  
other  is  in  state  Jt(x),  and  these  two  states  are  orthogonal and  normalized.  If  the  
two   articles  are distin  uishable   and  number  1 is  the  one in state Jn• then  the combined  
wave function is
5.1

if  they  are identical  bosons,  the composite  wave  lunction  is  (see Problem  5.4 for the 
normalization)

[5.16]





Let's calculate  the expectation  value of  the square  of  the separation distance

((x+  _ *")z)'     (=;) +  (<:)  — *(<›<:)                          [5.18]
Case 1: Distinguishable particles.  For the wavefunction  in Equation 5.15,



the expectation  value of x- in  the one-particle  state J,).





dx                        ² dx


In this case, then,

(t<i  — +2)':)v  =  (‹2)« +  l•')b — 2(x)  (x)t.                     [5.191

(Incidentally,  the  answer  would,  of  course,  be  the  same  if  particle  1  had  been  in
state tb.   and particle 2 in state Jq.)


er                                    es

Case 2: Identical particles.  For the wave functions in Equations 5.16 and 5.17,

i)    dxi     I/›(<2)1   dx_











x
2 '
Similarl




atur    y,















Evidently
, since you can             em apart.     ut





x2







(x) pz           x la  px)  lb{x) dx.                                    [5.20]



Comparing Equations  5.19 and 5,21, we see that the difference resides  in  the
final term:
[5.22]


$gcfion S,1,-  Tu›o-Particle Systems        209
F                 F             +                                       r                           
       F



FIGURE 5.1:    Schematic  picture  of  the  covalent  bond:  (a)  Symmetric:  configuration 
nroduces  attractive force. (h) Antisymmetric  configuration  produces repulsive force.

Identical bosons (the upper signs) tend to be somewhat closer together, and identical fermions  
(the  lower  signs)  somewhat  farther  apart,  than  distinguishable  particles iii  the  same  
two  states.  Notice  that   (x)„J,  vaiii.ches   unless   the  two  wave  func- tions  actually  
overlay   if  J,(z)  is  zero  wherever  /t(x)  is  nonzero,  the  hitegral in Equation  5.20 is  
zero]. So if  /„   represents  an electron  in an atom in Chicago, and     t,  represents  an  
electron  in  an  atom  in  Seattle,  it's  not  going  to  make  any difference  whether  you  
antisymmetrize  the  wave  function  or  not.  As  n  j rnctical matter,  therefore,  it's  okay  
to  pretend  that  electrons  with  nonoverlapping  wave functions  are distinguishable. (Indeed,  
this is the only  thing  that allows  physicists and  chemlsts  to  proceed  at  elf,  for  in  
prime hile  every  electron  in  the  universe  is linked  to everY  other  one, via  the 
antisymmetrization  of  their  wave  functions,  and i1 this really inritered, you wouldn't  be 
able to talk about  any one unless you were prepared  to deal  with them elf !)
The  interestin g  case  is  when  there  is  some  overlap  of  the  wave  functions. The system  
behaves  acs though  there were ‹a “force of  attraction”  between identical bosons,  pulling  them 
 closer  together,  and  a  “lorce  of  repulsion”  between  identi- cal fcrmions,  pushing  them  
apart  (remember  that  we  arc for  the moment  ignoring spin).  We  call  it  an  eschange  
force,  although  it's  not  really  a  force  at  all—no physical agency is pushing on the 
particles; rather, it is a purely  geom.etricul  conse- quence of the symmetrization requirement. 
It is also a strictly quantum mechanical phenomenon   with  nri  nlassinal  noricterpart   
Nevertheless   it  ha    r'rifoiind  nome-
quences.  Consider,  for  example,  the  hydrogen  molecule  (H2)  Roughly  speaking,
the ground state consists ot one electron in the atomic ground state (Equation 4.80) centered  on  
nucleus  1,  and  one  electron  in  the  atomic  ground  state  centered  at nucleus  2.  If  
electrons  were  bosons,  the  symmetrization requirement  (or,  if  you like,  the  “exchange  
force”)  would  tend  to  concendote  the  electrons  toward  the nñddle,  betwecn  the  twti  
proteins  (Figtue  5.1(a)),  and  the  resulting  accumulation of  negative  charge  would  attract 
 the  protons  inward,  accounting  for  the   covalent
bond.6  Unfortunately,  electrons  aren’I  bosons,  i:hey‘re  ferinions,  and  this  means
that  the  concentration  o1 negative  charge  should  actually  be  shifted  to  the  wings
(Figure  5.1(b)),  tearing  the molecule  apart!

'A  covalent bond occurs when shared electrons congregate  betwccn the nuclei,  pul’ling the atoms 
together,  It need  not  involve  for›  electron—in  Section 7.3  we'll  encounter  a. covalent  
bond  with just One  electron.

21

































5.2  ATOMS
IdenifCD

But  wait!  We  have  been  i    orin                              fete  state  of  the  electron 
includes  not  only  its  position  wave  function,  but  all    a  spinor,  describing  the 
orientation  of its spin.⁷

en  we  put  toget          e  two-e ectron  state,  it is  t             e  wor.     no

back at the composite spin states (Equations 4.177 and 4.178) reveals that the ringlet combination  
is antisymmetiâc (and hence would have to be joined with u symmetric spatial function), whereas the 
three triplet states are all symmetric (an5 would require minetric     uñal function).  Evidentl  , 
then, th          let state should lead to
bonding, and the triplet to anti bonding. Sure enough, the chemists tell us that covalent


•Problcm S.6  Imagine two  noninteracting particles, each                     in the infinite
well.  If  one  is in  the  state             uation 2.28),  and  the  other  in  state
alculate   (x   — •2)“J,  assuming  (a)  they  are  distinguishable  particles,



b (x), and one in state J,(x). Assuming Jq,  J¿„ and      are orthonormal, construct the 
three-particle states (analogous  to Equations 5.15         , and 5.17) representing

in mind  that       must  be   om  letel       mmetric   under interchan
particles, and (c) must be completely and symmetric, i   the same sense. Crmmcnr. s  a  cu       ic 
    or  cont       ing  comp       y  an  symme   ic  wave   unc ions:

whose second  row  is  t.(*2). tb(xz),     (x2),  etc., and  so  on (this  device  works for any 
number of particles).



eutral  atom   of  atomic  number  Z   consists  of                nucleus      ith  electric 
charge  Ze, surrounded  by  Z electron             m  and charge  —e). The Hamiltonian

e a  sence      coup ing       wcen  spin  an             on,  we are   ree   o assume           ie 
      e is sepai-able  in  its  spin  and  spatial  coordinates.  This  just       s  that  the  
probability  of  yetkng  spin  up  is in  epen  cnt  o           ncat on  of  the rartic       n  t 
    ymseuce  o   coup            e  genen    state  wou
thc form  of  a  linear combination:  i  +(r)y+ +                    as in  Problem  4.55.
In  casual  language,  it is often  said  that  the  elccuons  are  “oppositely  aligned”  (one  
with  spin up, and the other with spin down). This  is something  of  an oversimplification, since  
the same  could be. said of  the m  — 0  triplct state. The precise  statement  is that  they       
 in  the singlet  configuration.

Section 5.2.-  Atoms         211

for this system is⁹
H      Z   —
y2          1
1
o      r j    +    2    4
x
j f-k



[5.24]
it

lhe  term  in  curly  brackets  represents  the  kinetic  plus potential energy  of  tfie  /tm 
electron,  in  the  electric  field  of  the :nuc1eus;  the  second  sum  (which  runs  over all  
values  of   /  and  /r  except  y  =   k) is  the  potential  energy  associated  with  the mutual 
 repulsion  of  the  electrons  (the  factor  of  1/2 in  front  corrects  for  the fact that the 
summation  counts each pair twice), The problem is to solve Schrodinger's equation,
[5.25]


however,  not  all solutions  are acceptable:  only  those for which  the  complete state (position 
and  spin),

5.2:6

is antisymmetric  with respect  to interchange  of  any  two electrons.  In particular,  no
two  electrnns  can  err.spy  the  ,rule  state
Unfortunately,  the  Schrddinger  equation  with  Hamiltonian  in  Equation 5.24
cannot  be solved exactly  (at any rate,  it lie.rn’t  been),  except for  the  very  simplest

methods. Some of  these  we shall  explore in Part II; for now  I plan only to sketch some 
qualitative features of the solutions, obtained by neglecting the electron repul-

of  helium, and in Section 5.2.2 we'll  examine  the ground states of  higher atoms.


Prnhlem .5.8  Suppose you could find a solution  (i/z(r  , r2,   . . , r2)) to the Schrfi- dinger  
equation  (Equation  5.25),  for  the  Hamiltonian  in  Equation 5.24.  Describe how you would 
construct from it a completely symmetric function and a completely antisymmetric function, which 
also satisfy the Schrddinger equation, with the same energy.


I'iii assuming  Ltic  nucleus is  stutivricit y. The  tiicL u1’ accouiiting  fix‘ nuclear  iuati(;n 
 by  usiiig  the reduced mass (Problem 5.1) works only  for the  Ave-body  problem;  fortunately,  
the  nucleus is so much more  massive  than  the  electrons  that  the  correction  is  extremely  
small  even  in  the  case  of  hydrogen (see Problem  5.2(a)),  an‹1  it  is  smaller  still  for  
the  heavier  ‹atoms.  There  are  more  interesting  effects, due  to magnetic  interactions  
associated  with electron  spin,  relativistic  corrections,  and  thc finite size o1‘ the nucleus. 
 We'll  look into  these  in later chapters,  but  all o1‘ them are minute corrections  to the 
“purely coulombie”  atom desc•ribed  by Equation .5.24.



212          Cfinbfer S    Identical Particles

5.2.1  Helium
After hydrogen, the simplest atom is helium  (Z =  2). The Hamiltonian,


h2
2in
1     2e2              1           e2
4ncd  r_        4sc* In  — r21   (5.271

consists of  two hydrogenic  Hamiltonians  (with nuclear charge 2e), one fur electron 1 and one for 
electron  2. together  with a final term describing  the repulsion  of the two electrons. It is 
this last term that causes  all the trouble. If we simply  ignore  it, the Schrodinger  equation  
separates,  and the solutions can be written  as products o1 hydrogen  wave  functions:

[5.28]

only with half  the Bohr  radius  (Equation  4.72), and four  times  the Bohr energies (Equation  
4.70)—if  you  don't  see  why,  refer  back  to  Problem  4.16.  The  total energy  would be

E — 4

where  Ep  —  —13.6/ri   eV. In  pamcular,  the ground  state would  be
.29



[5.30]

see             s energy  won
to = 8(—13.6 eV) =  —109 eV.                              (5.3 JI

ground  state  of  helium  should  be  a  singled  configuration,  with  the  spine  “oppo- sifely  
aligned.”  The  mninf   ground  state  of  helium  is  indeed  a  singlet,  but  the experimentally 
 determined  energy  is  —78.975  eV,  so  the  agresment  is  not    ery good.  But  this is  
hardly  surprising:  We ignored  electron  repulsion,  which  is  cer- tainly  nor  a small 
contribution.  It is clearly  positive  (see Equation 5.27),  which is tDIIllurting—evidently  it  
brings  the  total  energy  up  from  —109  to  —79  eV  (see Problem .5.11).
The excited states of helium consist of one electron in the hydrogenic  ground
state, and tne other in an  excited  state:


I<  you  try  to  put  both  electrons  in  excited  states,  one  immediately  drops  to  the 
ground  state,  releasing  enough  energy  to  knock  the  other  one  into  the  contin- uum  (€   
     0),  leaving  you  with  a  helium  ion  (He+)  and  a  free  electron.  This


Section 5.2:   Atoms          213

is an interesting  system  in  its  own  right—see  Problem 5.9—but  it  is  not  our present  
concern.j  we  can  construct  Dotn  symmemc  am  antisymmetric  comnina- tiDns, in the usual way 
(Equation 5.10); the former go with the antisymmetric  spin
i                            configuration  (the singlet), and they are called parahelium, while 
the latter require
u symmetric  spin configuration  (the mplet),  and they  are known  as orthoheliuin.

Because the symmetric spatial state brings the electrons closer together (as we dis- covered in 
Section 5.1.2), we expect a higher interaction energy in parahelium, and

higher energy than  their ortliohelium counterparts  (see Figure 5.2).










4P      4D       4F










2P
4P      4D














FIGURE 5.2:    Energy   level    diagram   for   helium    (the   notation    is    explained    in 
Section 5.2.2). Note that parahelium  energies.are uniformly  higher  than their orthohe- lium 
counterparts.  The numerical values on the vertical scale are relative to the ground state  of 
ionized  helium (He    ): 4  x  (-13.6) eV =  —54.4 eV; to get  the total energy  of
e     aesu      a               e


er


em
(a)  Suppose  you  put both  electrons  in a helium atom into the n  — 2 state;  what



Problem 5.10  Discuss   (qualitatively)   the   energy   level   scheme   for  helium   if
(a) electrons  were identical  bosons, and (b) it electrons were distinguishable pam- 1/2, so the 
spin configurations  are the ringlet  and the triplet.


(:a)   Calculate ((1/|ri  —   2!)) for the state /d  (Equation 5.30). Hint.  Do the d'r2 ing sp     
                     es,        se

r,2 + r2   — 2•irz cos  2
The 8a  integral  is easy. but be careful  to take the  positive  root. You'll have to break the r2 
integral  into two pieces, one ranging  from 0 to r  , the other

se  your  res   t             to  e       ate  t  e  e ec  on     teract on  ener  y       t  e

to ñ    (Equation  5.31) to get a corrected estimate of  the ground state energy. Compare  the  
experimental  value,  (Of  course,  we're  still  working  with  an


5.2.2  The Perindic Table

much the same  way. To first  approximation  (ignoring  their mutual  repulsion  alto- gether),  
the  individual  electrons  occupy  one-particle  hydrogenic  states  (n, 1, m),

trons  were bosons  (or distinguishable particles)  they  would  all  shake down  to the ground  
state (1, 0, 0), and chemistry  would  be very  dull indeed.  But electrons  are in  i‹icr  
i‹iemicai  iermions,  SuDjec i  rti   be    rauii  excius ion  principle,  so  uniy  rwo can  
occupy  any  given  orbital  (one  with  spin  up,  and  one  with  spin  down—or, more precisely,  
in  the  ringlet configui'ation). There are n²  hydrogenic  wave func- tions  (all  with  the  same 
 energy  ng)  for  a  given  value  of  n,  so  the  n  =   1  sneu has  room  for  2  electrons,  
the  n  —  2 shell  holds  8,  n  =  3  takes  18,  and in  gen- eral  the  nth  shell  can  
accommodate  2n²  electrons.  Qualitatively,  the  horizontal rows  on  the Periodic Table  
correspond  to filling  out  each shell  (if  this  were  the




whole  story,  they  would  have  lengths  2,  8,  18,  32,  50,  etc.,  instead  of  2,  8,  8, 
18,  18, etc.; we'll see in a moment  how the electron-electron repulsion throws the
CGLlfl lJfl      GB
With  helium,  the n =  1 shell is filled, so the next atom, lithium (Z  —— ?), has to put  one  
electron  into  the  o  =  2  shell.  how,  ior  n      2 we  can  have         U  or

electron  interactions,  they  both  have  the  same  energy  (the  Bohr  energies  depend on n, 
remember,  but not on  /). But  the effect  of  electron repulsion is to favor  the
in    w  wcc       v ctictw    wi     i,     ixx      viii   iwziw vv rug        i  cci   xxxx     
x  rim    mzc*.    iiiwiiiwiicmaii    twxxvio    cv     *xti in vv
the  electron  outward,  and  the  farther  out  it  gets,  the  more  effectively  the  inner 
electrons  screen  the nucleus  (roughly  speaking,  the innermost  electron “sees”  the full  
nuclear  charge  Ze,  but  the outermost  electron  sees  an effective  charge  hardly creator  
than  r).  Within  a given  shell, the.refore,  the state with  lowest  energy Iwhich is to say,  
the most  tightly  bound  electron) is    =  0, and  the energy  increases  with increasing  1. 
Thus  the  third  electron in lithium  occupier  the orbital  (2, 0. 0). The

spin”), but boron (Z =  5) has to make use of  / =  1.
Continuing  in  this  way,  we reach  neon  (Z  =  10),  at  which  point  the  n  — 2

populate the n =  3 shell. First  there are two atoms  (sodium  and  magnesium)  with
/  =   0,  and  then  there  are  six  with  f       1  (aluminum  through  argon).  Following

ski
gon    ere   s  ou        e      a o
o   ever    y         ime    e
screening  effect is so strong  that  it  overlaps  the next shell,  so potassium  (Z  =   lS) and  
calcium  (Z =  20)  choose n  —— 4,  /  =   0,  in  preference  to  n  — 3, 1  —— 2. After at we    
        ac   to pic                                     stragg ers                       roug    
zlRO followed byr     =  4, I  =  1  (gallium through krypton), at which point  we again make a  
premature  jump  to the next row  (n =  5),  and  wait  until later  to slip in the I  =  2 and 1,  
   ?   orbitals  from  the n —— 4 shell. For  details  of  this intricate  counterpoint  I
refer  you  to any  book  on  atomic  physics.’0
I  would  be  delinquent  if  I  failed  to  mention  the  archaic  noinenclatui'e  for atomic  
states, because all chemists  and most  physicists  use it (and  the p:eople  who make  up  the  
Graduate  Record  Ezain  low  this  kind  of  thing).  For  reasons  known

(for “pi'incipa1”), 1 —— 2 is d (“diffuse”),  and    =  3 i.s  /’ (“fundamental”); after that I ess 
they r     o  t of i   agination   bec  u  e it now co  tinue      pha  eti      y (
but skip  /     just to be utterly pCrverse, k, 1, etc.).¹¹ The state of a particular electron
is represented  by the fair nl, with n (the number) giving the shell, and I (the letter)



New  York  (1944).
' ' Tlic  shells  themselves  are ‹isxi  ned  cqually .arbiti'ary. nicknarries,  starting  (don’t  
ask inc  why) with  K:  Thc  V  shell  is  n  =   1,  the  L  shell  is  ri  —  2,  ñf  is  it   —  
3,  and  so  on  (at  least  1hcy're  in
phabetl            er



216           Chapter  .S     Identical  Particle..s

specifying  the orbital angular momentum;  the magnetic  quantum  number m  is not state in 
question. Thus  the configuration

tells us that therc arc two electrons in the orbital (1, 0. 0), two in the orbitdl (2, 0, 0), and 
two in some combination  of the orbitals  (2, 1, 1), (2, 1, 0), and (2, 1, —1). This hanpens  to be 
the  ground  state of carbon.
In that example there are two electrons  with orbital angular momentum  quan- tum  number 1, so the 
total  orbital angular momentum  qiianttun number,  L  (capital L,  ins   ad  of  /,  to indicate  
that  this  pCf+ains  to  the  total.,  not  to any  one  pai4iclel) could  be  2, 1, or 0. 
Meanwhile,  the  two  (1.r)  electrons  are locked  together  in  the singlet  state,  with  total 
spin  zero,  and  so  are  the  two  (2s)  electrons,  but  the  two

the total  spin quantum  number  S (capital,  again, because it's the total) could be 1 or 0, 
Evidently  the  grant  total (orbital plus  spin),  7,  could  be 3, 2, 1, or 0. There exist  
rituals,  known  as  Hund's  ltules  (see  Problem  5.13)  for  figuring  out  what


hieroglyphic.

[5.34]

(where  S  and I  arc the numbers,  and  L  the letter—capitalized, this time,  because
we're  talking  about  the  totals).  The  ground  state  of  carbon  happens  to  be  "   o:

the  P),  and the  grand  total  angular momentum  is zero (hence  the 0). In  Table 5.1 the  
individual  configurations  and  the  total  angular  momenta  (in  the  notation  of Equation  
5.34) are listed, for the first four  rows of  the Periodic  Table.¹²

+Problem 5.12
(a)   Figure  out  the  electron  configurations  (in the  notation  o1' Equation  5.33)  for

against Table 5.1.
{b)   Figure out the corresponding  total angular’ momenta, in the notation  of Equa- tion 5.34, 
for the first four  elements.  List  all  the  possihil.ities for boron,  car- bon, and  nitrogen.



1-After  krypton—element  36—the  situation  gets  morc complicatcd  (fine strticttii'e  starts to 
play a significant  role  in  the ordering  of  the .states) so it  is  not  for  want  ol‘ space  
that  the  table  terminates there.

Section 3.2.-  Adorns         217
TABLE S.I:    Ground state electron configu- rations for the first fofir rows of the 1'eriodic 
Table.

Z     Element
1         M
2     He
3     Li
He

(1S)2
Configuration


:2e

2
/2


6     C
7     N
8    0
9     F
10     Nc
11     Na
12     Mg
13     A1
14     Si
15     P
16     S
17     C1
18     Ar
19     K
20     Ca
21     Sc
22     Ti















(Ar)(45)
fAr)f4,‹)2
(Ar)(4s)2(3d)
(Ar)(4s)²(3d)²
3 pt
453/2

'So
“    1/2

2      2
'  o
4z//2
3p2
2   372


24      Cr
25    .Mn
25.     be
27     Co
28     Ni
29     C
30     Zn
31     Ga
32     Ge
33     As
34     Se
35     Br
36     Kr
(Ar)(4s)(3r/ )’
(Ar)(4fi)2(3d )⁵
(Ar)(4s)²{3d)
(Ar)(4s)2(3d)7                ‘kg/2
(Ar)(4s)2(3s  )°               3F4
(Ar)(4s)(3d)10              2s,g2
(Ar)(4x)2(3d)10                150
(Ar)(4s)2(3dJl()f4p)       2P;  a
(Ar)(4i)2(3d)"(4p)2       *P
(Ar)(4s)2(3d)"(4p)3      ^S@/2
(Ar)(4S)2(3d)*   4p)’     - P y
(Ar)(4i)2(3d) 10(4p)       'P3j2
(Ar)(4.s)*(3d)t   4p)6      ’Sq








lem 5.13

(a)  Hund's first rule says that, consistent with the Pauli principle, the state with the highest 
total spin {S) will have the lowest energy. What would this predict

s  e  on        e say  t  a    or    g   en s          e  t  te    it      e    g  est tota

will  have the  lowest  energy. Why  doesn't  carbon  have  L  =  2* Hint.  Note that the “top of  
the ladder” (ML =- L) is symmetric.
(c)  Hund⁹s third  rule  says  that  if  a subshell  (n, f)  is  no more  than half  filled, then 
the lowest energy level has J ==   L —6'|; if it is more than half filled, then

in Problem 5.12(b).
(d)   Use Hund's  rules, together  with the fact that  a symmetric  spin state must go with  an  
antisymmetric  position  state  (and  vice  versa)  to  resolve  the carbon and nitrogen 
ambiguities in Problem 5.12(b). Hint: Always go to the “top of the ladder”  to figure out the 
symmetry  of  a state.



ste
ae groun
o     y  p os ute e   ent       in    e   t    o    o     e
Periodic Table) is listed as        What are the total spin, total orbital, and grand total angular 
momentum  quantum  numbers? Suggest  a likely electron configuration for dysprosium.




In the solid state,  a few of  the loosely  bound  outermost  valence electrons in each atom become 
detached, and roam around throughout the material, no longer subject only to the Coulomb field of 
a.specific “parent” nucleus, but rather to the combined potential of the entire crystal lattice. In 
this section we will examine two extremely primitive  models:  first,  the electron  gas  theory  
of  Sommerfeld,  which ignores  all forces  (except  the confining  boundaries),  treating  the  
wandering  electrons  as free

second, Bloch's theory, which introduces a periodic potential representing  the elec- trical 
attraction o1 the regularly  spaced, positiyely charged, nuclei (but still ignores 
electron-electron repulsion). These models  are no more than the first halting  steps toward  a  
quantum  theory  of  solids,  but  akeady  they  reveal  the  critical  role  of the Pauli 
exclusion  principle in accounting for “solidity,”  and provide illuminating

Section S.3.  Solids        219

insight  into  the  remarkable  electrical  properties  of  conductors,  semi-conductors, and  
insulators.

5.3.1  The Free Electron Gas
Suppose  the  object  in  question  is  a rectangular  solid,  with  dimensions  fg,  ly#  lz z and 
 imagine  that  an  electron  inside  experiences  no  forces  at  all,  except  at  the 
impenetrable  walls:


0,      if 0     x < lz,    0 <  y  < I  , and 0 on,    otherwise.

The Schrddinger  equation,
[5.35]



separates,  in cartesian  coordinates:   f{x, y, z)  —  X(x)Y   y) Z(z), with
fi2  d2X                            fi2   d2Y                            h2  d   Z

and  E  —       +  E y     E¿. Letting


y   "          h
we obtain  the general  solutions





The  boundary  conditions  require  that  X(0)      Y{0}      Z(0)      0,  so  Bg  —  B B-     0, 
and  X(/2)     Y pfy) — Z(I¿) =  0, so that


where each  n is ‹a positive integer:

ng      1, 2, 3, ...   ,          — 1, 2, 3, ...   ,              1, 2, 3, ...   .          [5.371
The (normalized)  wave functions  are

8    slll                 x)  sin           y)  slll                                               
[5.38]



220           Chapter S     Identic.al PfffififJes

an      e a  owe   eneTgies are

n2                                                           [5.39)


where k is the magnitude of  the  wave vector,  k      (k2   y k y z   ¿)•
If  you  imagine  a  three-dimensional  space,  with  axes  kg,  k  ,  kg, and  planes
awn in a



kz

























FIGURE 5.3:    Free electron gas. Each intersection  on the grid represents a stationary state. 
Shading indicates one “block”; there is one state for every block.



Section S.3:  Solids         221
‹i  distinct  (one-p‹irtic1e) st‹ition‹iry  st‹tte  (*'8•re 5.3). Each  block  in  this  grid,  
‹ind hence also each state, occupies  a volume



of  “k—space,”  where  V       fgf ,f-  is  the  volume  of  the  object  itself.  Suppose  our 
sample  contains  N  atoms,  and  cach  atom  contributes  q  free  electrons.  (In  prac- tice,  N 
  will  be  enormous—on  the  order  of  Avogadro's  number,  for  an  object of  macroscopic  
size—whereas  q  is  a  small  number—1  or  2,  typically.)  If  elec- trons  were  bosons  (or  
distinguishable  particles),  they  would  all  settle  down  to the  ground   state,   7•l 11 -  " 
  Rut  electrons   are  in   fact  identical  Jimiris.r,  subject to  the  Pauli  exclusion   
principle,   so  only  two  of  them  can  occupy  any  given state.  They  will  fill  up  one  
octant  of  a  sphere  in  k-space,'⁴  whose  radius,  kp, is  detennined   by  the  fact  that  
each  pair  of  electrons  requires  a  volume  x³/V (Equation  5.40):



Thus


where
1
8    3                  2       V




Nq



[5.41]


[1.42]


The boundaiy separating occupied and unoccupied  states, in k-space. is called the Fermi surface 
(hence the subscript  F). The corresponding  energy is called the Fermi energy,  E z,  f'or  a free 
electron  gas,


2m
The  rr›rol  energy  of  the  electron  gas  can  be  caIculated  as  follows:  A  shell  of 
thickness  dk  (Figure 5.4)  contains  a volume



its collective ground state. If  you like, I'm  talking about a “cold” solid. though  (a,s you  
will show '"Because  N  is such a huge  number,  we need  not worry  about the distinction  between 
 the actual
jagged edge of  the  grid aild  the smooth  spherical  surface  that approximates  it,.










dk








ky





:         nc o  t     t o   a sp   e  ica   s   e             space

so the number  of electron  states in the shell  is

k'  dk.

Each of  these  states carries  an  energy  ñ²k*/2in  (Equation  5:39),  so the energy  of



and hence the total energy  is

k’ dk  —                          10a    m                               [5.451

thermal  energy  (U} of  an  ordinary  gas.  In  particular,  it  exerts  a  pressure  on the 
walls, for if the box expands by an amount dV,   the total energy decreases:

2       d V
—— E

and  this  shows  up  as  work  done  on  the  outside  (d W         P  dV     by  the  quantum
pressure  P.   Evidently


gp2  2/3 2.

[5.46)

Section 5.3.-  Solids        223

Here,  then, is a  partial answer  to  the question  of  why  a cold  solid  object  doesn't simply 
 collapse: There is a stabilizing internal pressure, having  nothing to do with electron-electron 
repulsion (which we have ignored)  or thermal  motion (which  we naive  cxciudctij,   but  is   
siiicriy   tJuunruiii  mcii‹iiiic‹ii,  ‹mid  ‹revives  uiriiintrcly   ?Lvni the antisymmetrization 
requirement for the wave functions of identical fermions. It is sometimes called degeneracy  
pressure,  though “exclusion  pressure” might be a
better term.15

L ronieMi  o, in    rm‹i me  average  energy  per  tree  electron  t<tot/JY qj,    as  a  traction 
of  the Fermi  energy.  Answer:  (.3 f5)    F

Prohlem 5.16  The  density  of  copper  is  8.96  gm/cm³,  and  its  atomic  weight  is
63.5 gm/mole.
(a)   Calculate  the Fermi energy  for copper  (Equation 5.43). Assume  q      1, and give your 
answer in electron volts.
What is the corresponding  electron  velocity?  Hint:  Set  Er      fl /2)m 02. Is it safe to 
assume  the electrons  in copper are  nonrelativistic?
(c At what temperature would the characteristic thermal energy   kB+,  where kB is the Boltzmann 
constant and 7  is the Melvin  temperature) equal  Inc Fermi energy,  for  copper?  Comment:  This  
is  called  the  Fermi  temperature.  As long as the actual  temperature  is substantially  below 
the Fermi temperature,
the  material  can  be  regarded  as  “cold,”  with  most  of  the  electrons  in  the

copner is alwavs  cold.
(d)   Calculate  the degeneracy  pressure  (Equation 5.46) of copper, in the electron gas model.


Problcm 5.17  The bulk modulus  of  a substance  is the ratio of  a  small decrease in pressure  to 
the resulting  fractional  increase in volume:
B      —V d P

Show  that  B       (5/?) P,  N  the  free  electron  gas  model,  and  use  your  result  in 
Problem 5.16(d) to estimate  the bulk modulus  of copper. Comment:  The observed value  is  13.:4  
x 10*'  N/m², but  don't  expect  perfect  agreement—:after  all.  we‘re

I'We dr.rived  Equations  5.41, 5.43, 5.45, and 5.4ti for the special case ot  an infinite 
rectangular
well,  but  tlley  hold  ftii  containers  of  any  shape. ax  long  as the  nuiiiber  of  
particles  is extremely  large.

neglecting  all  electron-nucleus  anda electron-electron forces!  Actually,  it  is rather



5.3.2  Band Structure
We're  now  going  to  improve  on  the  free  electron  model  by  including  the forces
exerted  on  the  electrons  by  the  regularly  spaced,  positively  charged,  essentially

degree by the mere fact that this potential is peri‹rdic —its actual shape  is relevant only to the 
finer details. To show you how it goes, I'm going to develop the simplest possible model: a 
one-dimensional Dirac comb, consisting of evenly  spaced delta function spikes (Figure 5.5).’   But 
first I need to introduce a powerful theorem that vastly  simplifies  the analysis of  periodic  
potentials.
A periodic  potential is one tnat  repeats itseu atter some nxeo distance  o:

[5,47]

Bloch's theorem tells us that for such a potential thc solutions  tO the Schrodinger
equation,


can be taken to satisfy the condition

f5.491

ior some constant  n  tDy   constant   i mean tnat it is inoepenoent  or x,’ it may weir depend on  
E).




I                 I




—2a                         2a             3a

FIGURE 5.5:    The Dirac comb, Equatloo 5.57.

5a              6a


'*It Would be more natural to let  the dclm functions go down, so as to represent  thc attractive 
force of  the  nuclei.  Dut  then  there  would  be  negative  energy  solutions  as well  as 
positive  energy  solutions, and thai makes the calculations  more cumbersome  (see Problem 5.20).  
Since all we're trying  to do here is explore  the. consequences  of periotlicity,  it is  simpler  
to aclopt  this less Flausible shape; if  it comforts
ynu,  think  of the nuclei  as residing  at  +o/2,  + 3a/2,  ñ5«/2, ....




Proof:  Let  D be the “displacement” operator:

D f(x)       f{x + a).                                      [5.50]

ror  a periomc potentiai (nquauon  3.4’ij,      commutes  wiui tire riamiltoman.

ID,/f]=0,                [5.51]
and hence we are free to choose eigenfunctions of  H that are simultaneously eigenfunctions of  D:  
D f      L f,  or

[5.52]
Now, X  is certainly  not hero (if it were, then—since Equation  5.52 holds for ull  x—we would  
immediately  obtain   f{x)  — 0,  which  is not a permissible eigenfunctron); like any nonzero 
complex  number, it can be expressed  as an ex      en

for some  constant  K.     QED

At  this  stage  Equation 5.33  is  just a  strange  way to write  the  eigenvalue  X, but  in a  
moment  we  will  discover  that  K  is  in  fact  rectl, so  that  although  J(x) itself is not 
periodic, |   (x)|* r.s:



as one would  certainly  expect.¹7
[5.54]
Of  course,  no  re‹tJ  :solid  goes  on forever,  and  the  edges  are  going  to  spoil

any macroscopic  crystal,  containing  something  on the order of  Avogadro's  number of  atoms,  
it  is hardly  imaginable  that  edge  effects  can  significantly  influence  the

Bloch's  theorem:  We  wrap  the x-axis  around  in a  circle,  and  connect  it  onto  its tail, 
after a large number  N     10²" of  periods; formally,  we impose the boundary condition
[5.55]

It       ows     om    quation              at




'7lndeed, ypu  might  be tempted  to reverse  the  art'  merR,  starting  with Equation 5,54,  as  
a way of  proving  Bloch's theorem.  It  doesn’t  work,  for Equation  5.54  alone  would  allow  
the phase  factor in Equation  5.49 to  be  a  junction  of   x.


apter           entica

so e’NA° —— 1, or NKu     2un, and  hence

(n =   0,   +  1,        2,   , , . ).                             [5.56]


theorem  is that  we need  only solve  the  Schrodinger  Equation  within. n single  cell
(say, on the interval  0     x  <  n); recursive  application of Equation  5.49 generates

Now,  suppose  the potential  consists  of  a long  string  of  delta-function spikes (the Dimc 
comb):





akFi    re    5   o       ust  i
I ——0

it     e             ha   b    n      r       d      und
the Cth  spike  actually  appears  at x  =  —n.)  No  one  would  pretend  that  this  is  a rea is 
ic  mo  e ,   u  remem  er. i  is on y    e e  ec  o  Kerio  ter        a  concerns  us here;  the  
classic  study*    used  a  repeating  rectangul.ar  pattern,  and  many  authors still prefer that 
one.’9 In the region 0     z  <  n  the potential is zero,  so

’2  .2
—       2 —fQ,


——k2/,


wherc
h                                                                      5.581

as usua ,
The  general  solution  i:s

z   =     sin   x           os“  x  ,         < x < o  .
According  to  Bloch's  theorem,  the  wave  function  in  the  cell  immediately  to  the
e    o      e origin  is
(.x)  — e  'K‘[A  siR k(x + o) +  B cv s k(x + a}),     (—a      x      0).        [5.60]

'  R. de L.  Krenig and W. G. Penney,  Proc. R. Soc. Loud., ser. A, 130, 499  (1930).

York  (1992).




*"




At x  — 0,      must be  continuous,  so
[5.61]

its derivative suffers a discnntinBity PrnPnrfional  to the.strength  of the delia function 
(Equation 2.125,  with  the  sign  of  o  switched,  since  these  are  spikes  instead  of w    
s):
kA  — e  "‘k[Acas(ka)  —  B  sin(ka)]  —  2mn A.                  [5.62]


Solving  Equation  5.61 for  A sin(km)  yields
A sin(/rn)         e'’K‘  — cos(k‹i)]B.


[5.63]



tf'fia     coS(to)) [1 — e  ’‘K‘ cas(ka)  +  e"““      sin  (ka)               sin(km),
/   k
which simplifics to

64]


potential  (see  footnote  18),  the  formula  is  more  complicated,  but  it  shares  the 
qualitative  features  we arc about  to explore.

energies.  To simplify  the notation,  let



so the right  side of Equation  5.64 can be written  as

[5.66]


In  Figure  5.6  I  have  plotted   #(z),  for  the  case  Q  =   10.  The  important  thing  to 
notice is that  {(z)  strays outside  the range  (—1, 11), and in such regions  there is

than  1.  These  gaps  represent  /orbidden   energies;  they  are  separated  by  bands
of  allowed  energies.  Within  a  given  band,  virtually  any  energy  is  allowed,  sincc

be  any  integer.  You  might  imagine  drawing  N  horizontal  lines  on  Figure  5.6,  at values 
of cos(2sn/N) ranging from +1 (n      0) down  to  — 1  (n  =  V/2), and  back ms          +        
 =                           i        n             o         c               rcyce          n

228          Chapter 3    Identicul  Particles




1

                                                                                0 

—1                                                                                               —1



0

FIGURE 5.6:    Graph  of  /(z)  (Equation 5.66)  for  §   =   10,  showing  allowed  bands

(shaded) separated by forbidden  gaps (where ›If  <›I
1).

E


band



'   gap


band







band










FIGURE 5.7:    The   allowed   energies   for   a   periodic potential  form essentially  
continuous  bands.

new  solutions  are  p•enerated  by  further  increasing  it.  The  intersection  of  each  of 
these mines  with   ff-4  vieldx  rim  nllnwed  enerwv   Fvidentlv  there are  N  states  in each 
band,  so  closely  spaced  that  for most  purposes  we can  regard  them  as  forming  a 
continuum  (Fip•ure  5.7).
So far,  we’ve  only  put  one  electron  in  our  potential.  In  practice  there  will  be N    
of them,  where q  is ap•ain  the number of “free” electrons per atom. Because of the Pauli  
exclusion  principle,  only  two electrons  can occupy  a given  spatial  state.

first  band,  lf ry  =   3 they  half  fill  the second  band, and so on—in  the ground  state. (In 
 three  dimensions,  and  wlth  more  realistic  potentials,  the  band  structure  may

Section  S.3.  Solids         229

be  more  complicated,  but  the  e.vistence  of  allowed  bands.  separated  by  forbidden

Now,  if  a  band  is  entirely  filled,  it  takes  a  relatively  large  enerp•y  to  excite an  
electron,  since  it  has  to  juiiip  across  the  forbidden  zone.  Such  materials  will be 
electrical  insulators.  On  the other  hand,  if  a  band  is only yaorfl;  filled. it  takes very 
 little  energy  to excite  an  electron,  and  such  materials  are  typically  conduc- tors.  If  
you  dope  an  insulator  with  a  few  atoms  of 1arp•er  or  smaller  q,  this  puts soine  
“extra'  electrons  into  the  next  higher  band,  oi‘  creates  some  holes  in  the pi cv iuuhiy 
 minu  wire,  «mummy  iii  ci rim   u«>c  iai   were  ciccL  ie  cut i cuts  iu  inw, such  
materials  are  called  semiconductors.  Ill  the  free  electron  iiiodel  all  solids should  be  
excellent  conductors,  since  there  are  no 1arp•e  p•aps  in  the  spectrum  of allowed  
energies.  lt  takes  the  band  theory  to account  foi‘  the  extraordinary  range of  electrical 
 conductivities exhibited  by  the solids  in  nature.

Problem .s.18
(a)   Using Equations  5.59 and 5.63, show  that the wave function  for a panicle  in the periodic  
delta function  potential  can  be written  in  the form


(Don't  bother  to determine  the  normalization  constant  C.)
(b)   There  is an  exception:  At  the  top  of  a  band,  where  t  is  an  integer  multiple of  
u  (Figuie 5.6),  (a)  yields     (x)  =  0. Find  the correct  wave  function  for this case. Note 
 what  happens  to      at each  delta function.

Problem  5.19  Find  the  energy  at  the  bottom  of  the  first  allowed  band,  for  the case $  
=  10, correct  to three significant  digits. For  the sake of  argument,  assume n/o = 1 eV.

s srrooiciii s.zu  suppose we use ñeiia iunciion   heirs, insieao or s›txes ti.e., sWllCn me sign 
of a  in Equation 5.57). Analyze this case, constructing  the analog to Fip•ure 5.6. This requires  
no new calculation, for the positive energy solutions (except  that $  is now negative. use g =  
—1.5 for the graph), but you do need to work out the liegative energy  solutions (let c             
2    E fit  and  e  =   —co, for  E  < 0). How  many states are there in the first allowed  band?

Problem 5.21  Show  that  mo.st  of  the  enerp•ies  determined  by  Equation  5.64  are dou0ly  
deg•enerate.  what  are tne exceptional  cases   niiii:  fry  it  tor  N  ——  I , Z, 5. 4, .  . , 
to see how  it goes. What are the possible  values of cos(Ro)  in each  case?

230         Chapter 5    Identical  I?ariicles

5.4      UANTUM STATISTICAL MECHANICS
At  absolute  zero,  a physical  system  occupies  its  lowest  allowed  energy  configura- tion.  
As we turn up the temperature,  random  thermal activity  will bep•in  to populate the excited  
states, and  this raises  the following  question: If we have a large number N  of particles,  in 
thermal  equilibrium  at  temperature  T,   what is the probability  that a  particle,  selected  
at  random,   would  be  found  to  have  the  specific  energy,   Ei*
Note  that  the  “probability”  in  question  has  nothing  to  dO  Wlth  quantum  indeter-
minacy—exactly  the  same  question  arises  in  classical   statistical  mechanics.  The reason  
we  must   be  content   with  a  pi ohnhilislic   answer  is  that  we  are  typictil1y dealing  
with  enormous  numbers  of  particles,  and  we  could  not  possibly  expect to  keep  track  of  
each  one  separately,  whether  o   not  the  underlying  mechanics  is

The  fundamental   assumption  of  statistical  mechanics  is  that  in  thermal equilibrium  every 
 distinct  state  with  the  same  total  enerp•y,  E,   is  equally  proba- ble. Random  thermal  
motions  constantly  shift  enerp•y  from one particle  to another, and  from  one  form  
(rotational,  kinetic,   vibrational,  etc.)  to  another,   but  (absent external  influences)  
the  total  lS  fixed  by  conservation  of  energ•y.  The  assumption (and  it's  a deep  one,  
worth  thinkinp•  about)  is  that  this  continual  redistribution of

sure  of  the  total  enerp•y  of  a  system  in  thermal  equilibrium.  The  only  new  twist 
introduced  by  quantum  mechanics  has  to do  with  /tou›  Ave coi,int  the distinct  states 
(it's  actually  easier‘   than  in  the  classical  theory,  because  the  states  are  generally 
discrete),  and  this  depends  critically  on  whether   the  particles  involved  are  dis- 
tinguishable,  identical  bosons,  or  identical  ferinions.  The  arguments  are  relatively 
straig•htforward,  but  the  nrirfiineric   gets  pretty  dense,  so  I'iTi  going  to  begin  with 
an  absurdly  simple  example,  sn  you’11  have  a  clear  sense  nf  what  is  at  issue  when we 
come  lo  the  g•enera1  case.

5.4.1  An Example
Suppose  we  have  just  three  lioninteracting  particles  (all  of  mass  to)  in  the  one-


+ ••B + nc)               f5.67]
(see Equation  2.27),  where i›A. nB. and xp  are positive integers. Now  suppose,  for
the  sake  of  ar•punient.  that  E  ——  363(x'/i-/2ino'),  which  is  to  say,

''A +"B  +"c  —— 363.                                 [5.68]
There  are,  as  it  happens,  13  combinations  of  three  positive  integers,  the  sum of  whose 
 squares  is  363:  All  three  could  be  11,  two  could  be  13  and  one  5

Section .I.4:  Qtiantum Sttitistical Mecfinnics         231

(which  occurs  in  three  permutations),  one  could  be  19  and  two  l  (again,  three 
permutations),  or  one  couid   be  1 /,  one   /,  and  one  o  tsix  permutations).   i nris 
(!!.    !! B   !! c 1  ’is one  of  the following:

(11,  11,  11).
( 13. 13, 5),  (13, 5, 13).  (5, 13. 13).
(1. 1. 19).  (l.  19. 1).  (19. 1. 1).
(5, 7. 17),  (5, 17, 7).  (7, 5. 17).  (7. 17, 5),  (17, 5, 7),  ( 17, 7. 5).

If the particles are di.itiitguisliahle, each of these represents a distinct quantum state, and  
the fundamental  assumption  of statistical  mechanics  says that  in thermal equllibrium"  they  
are all equally  likely.  But I'm  not  interested  in knowing  which

state—the  occupation  number.  Nil, for  the state  J„.  The collection  of  all  occu- pation  
numbers  for  a  p•iven  3-particle  state  we  will  call  the configuration.  If  all thi'ee  are 
in  J;  ; .  the configuration  is

(0. 0, 0, 0. 0, 0. 0. 0. 0, 0, 3. 0, 0. 0. 0. 0, 0. 0. ...  ).                 [5.69]

fi.e.   N›    =   3.  all  withers  zeros.  If  two  are  in  Sri s  and  rine  is  in  i/ •-  the  
crinfi•ura-
tion  is
(0. 0, 0. 0. 1. 0, 0. 0. 0. 0, 0, 0. 2, 0. 0. 0. 0, ...  ).                  [5.70]

(i.e„  N5 =  1,  N  ;      2,  all  others  zero). If  two  are  in  /;    and  one  is  in  ti  9. 
 the configuration  is

(2, 0, 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0, 0, 0. 0. 0. 0, 0. 0. 0, 1. 0. ...  ),             [5.71]

(i.e.,  N   =  2,  Ni9 =  1, all others  zero).  And  if  there  is one  particle  in  Ji,   one  
in Jv, and one in  /i7. the config•uration is


(i.e.,  N5 =  N       N17  -    l,  all others  zero.) Of  these,  the  last  is  the iiin5f  y  
-n6ri6fe configuration, because it can  be achieved  in six different  ways, whereas the middle two 
occur  three  ways, and  the first  only  one.

-"Huw the partic les n1t1mt‹Sin  thermal crtuilihriuin. il’ they ieaIly don’I interact at all. is a 
prohlcni I a rather not woi°ry  abouc—mnyne  Iboa roa«ncs in periodically  i\N@  st}l’S  u1Ii1gs  
up (nuiilg ctiretul not fCâ iI// UF l‘cmove  any eneigy).  In  real lite,  of’ coursc.  the 
continual icJislribution  of enci°gy  is ctiuscd pi‘ecisely lay intei'actions between  the 
particles. so il* you don't approve c›I’ divine intci°vcntion  Jet there be extremely  weak 
interactions—sufficient to tlJcrmi\lizc  the system (bit lctist. over long time pcrit›ds). but tt›o 
small to alter the SI:\(ionary  states and the zilluwcJ energies ‹appreciably.

232            Chapter  S     Identical  Particles

Returning  now to my original question,  if we select one of these three particles at  random,  
what  is  the probability  (Pty)  of  getting  a specific  (allowed)  energy  £„? The only  way  
you can get  £1  is if it's in the third configuration  (Equation  5.71); the chances  of  the  
system  being  in  that  configuration  are  3  in  13,  and  in  that  config- uration  the  
probability   of  getting   E     is  2/3,  sO  *'l   =    (3/ 13)  x  (2/3)  =   2/13. You  could  
 get   £5  either   from   configuration   2  (Equation  5.70)—chances   3   in 13—with  
probability   1/3,  or  from  configuration  4  (Equation  5.72)—chances  6 in  13 —with  
probability   1/3,  so  P;   —  (3/ 13)  x  (1/3) +   (6/ 13)  x  (1/3)  =   3/13. You  can  only  
get  E7 from  configuration  4:  P7      (6/13)  x  (1/3)  =   2/13.  Like- wise,  Hii  comes  only 
 from  the  first  configuration  (Equation  5.69)—chances  1  in
13 —with  probability   1:     11  =    (1/13).  Similarly,'  PU       (3/13)  x  (2/3)  =   2/13,
17  —  (6/13)  x  (1/3)  =   2/13,  and  P 9       (3/13)  X  (1/3)  —  1/13.  As  a  check,



2        3        2        1        2        2        1
I  +       5 +     7+       1.1 +      13 +      17 +                  13      13 +   13 +   13     
 13 +   13 +   13
=  i.

That's   when   the  paHicles  are  distinguishable.  If  in  fact   they   are  identical [ei 
itiioiis, the antisymmetrization requirement  (leaving aside spin, for simplicity—or
ne

state),  and  there is just  oxic  state  in  the  fourth  configuration  (see Problem 5.22(a)). 
For  identical  fermions,  then,  Ps  —  P7 =   P17=   1/3  (and  again  the  sum  of  the
tion  requirement  allows  for  oiie  state  in each  configuration  (see Problem 5.22(b)),

so  P    =   (1/4)  x  (2/3)         1/6',     5
(1/4)  x  (1/3)  -F  (1/4)  x  (1/3)   =    1/6,

'     17        (1/4)  x  (1/3)  =   1/12,  and  Pi9      (1/4)  x  (1/3)  =   1/ 12.  As  always,  
the
suin is 1.
The  purpose  of  this  example  was  to  show  you  how  the  counting  of  states depends on  the 
nature  of  the particles.  In one respect  it  was  actually  mm e cnity›li-
‹nted  than  the  realistic  situation,  in  which  N  is  a  huge  number.  For  as  N  grows, 
tfie most probable configuration  (in this exaiiiple,  N5       N7 =   N I    =   1, for tfie case 
of distinguishable particles) becomes ovei›i!l7£'lmiti(1y  more likely  than its competi- tors, so 
that, for statistical purposes,  we can afford to ignore  the others altogether:" Tlte  distr 
ibutioit  of  indi»idual  pni-ticle  energies,  cit  eqtiilil›i iiun,  is  siitipl y their  dis-
tr ibution  tit  the most pi obable coii/gHratioii. (lf  this  were  true  Nov  N  —— 3—which. 
obviously,  it  is no/—we  would  conclude  that  P•f  ——    7  =   Pl7      1/3  for  the  case of 
 distinguishable  particles.)  I'11  return  to  this  point  in  Section  5.4.3,  but  first  we 
ncea  to genGraiize  tire  counting  proceaure  iiscn,

—' This is :in  astonishing  and countorintuitivo fact  about  the statistics oi’ large number's.  
For a gcod discussion  see Ralph  Baicrlcin,  Thermal  Plt; si‹•s.  Cambridge  U.P. (1999).  
Section  2.1 .

Section 5.4:  Quantum Stritisticril Mecfirtflics         233


+Problem  5.22
(a)   Construct   the  completely   antisymmetric   wave  function   f(i A. -!B   -! c)    for
the state
(b)   Construct  the  completely  symmetric  wave  function   f(xA.  x     xC)  for  three 
identical  bosons,  (i)  if  all  three  are  in  state  4i  i .  (ii)  if  two  are  in  state  
and one is in state  T19. and (iii) if one is in the state  Jt,    one in the state  Y7,


Problem  5.23  Suppose  you  had  three  (noninteracting)  particles. in  thermal  equi- librium,  
in  a  one-dimensional  harmonic  oscillator  potential,  with  a  total  energy

(a)   If  they  are  di.stinguishab1e  particles  (but  all  with  the  same  mass),  what  are the 
possible occupation-number configurations, and how many distinct (three- particle) states are  
there for each one? What  is the most  probable configura- tion? If you picked a particle at random 
and measured its energy, what values knight  you  get,  and  what  is  the  probability  of  each  
one?  What  is  the  riiost

(b)   Do the same for  the case of  identical  fermions  (ignoring  spin,  as  we  did  in Section  
5.4.1).
(c)   Do the same for the case of  identical  bosons  (ignoring  spin).


5.4.2  The General Case
Now consider an arbitrary  potential,  for which the one-particle energies  are £   , L„ Ez.... ,  
with  degeneracies  d  . dz, ‹1  .  ...      (i.e.,  there  are  d„  distinct  one-particle states  
with  energy  €„).  Suppose  we  put  N  particles  (all  with  the  same  mass)  into

there  are  N    particles  with  energy   EI.  N;  particles  with  enerp•y   E;,    and  so  on. 
Que.ation:   How  many  different   ways  can  this  be  achieved  (or,  more  precisely, how  many 
 distinct  states  correspond  to  this  particular  configuration)? The  answer,
G(N     . N     Nz.  ...    ), dependx  on  whether  the particlex  are dixtingriixhahle, identical
fermions,  or identical  bosons,  so  we'll  treat  the  three cases separately."
First,  assume  the  particles  are  distingtiislinble. How  many  ways  are  there  to
select  (from  the  N  available  candidates)  the  N    to  be  placed  in  the  first  “bin”?

'-The  pi'esentation  here  follows  clo.sely  that  of  Aninon  Yariv,  Art  Iitti'odiictioit  t‹› 
Tlieoi-;  aitd A ›yli‹•‹itioit.  ‹›{Qiiatttuut  Mecltuuic. . Wilcy.  New  York  (1982).


aptei             entic i               es

Answer .   the  binomial  coefficient,  “N    choose  N   ,”



For  there  are  N  ways  to pick  the first  particle,  leaving  (N — 1)  for  the second,  and
so on:                                                                                              
 N!        
N(N   —  I)(N  — 2) ...   (N  —  N   +  1

However.  this counts separately  the  N  ! different  yer nii,itntiott,i of the N   particles, 
whereas  we  don't  care  whether  number  37  was  picked  on  the  first  draw,  or  on

different  waYs  can  those  Ni  particles  be  arranp•ed  u•i/fT1fi   the  first  bin?  Well,  
there are d   states  in the  bin,  so each  particle  has d   choices;  evidently  there  are  (S) 
 N' possii›iiities  in  air.  Thus  the  number  of  ways  to  put  /rl  particles,  seiecte‹i  
from  a total  population  of  N,  ‘into  a  bin  containing  d    distinct  options,  is



The  same  goes  for  bin  2,  of  course,  except  that  there  are  now  only  {N  —  Nl) 
articles  left  to  work  with:



and  so on. It follows  that




e z     r


=   N!   1      2      3
[3.74]

(You should pause right now and clteck  this result, for the example in Section 5.4.1—

The  nroblem  is  a  lot  easier  for  ideiitic‹il  Lei‘itiioiis.  Because  thev  are  indis- 
tinguishable,  it  doesn't  matter  ›i›liich  particles  are  in  which  states—the  antisym- 
metrization  requirement   means  that  there  is just  once  N-particle  state  in  which  a
cnPr‘   fir‘   cPt    mfi   nnP-nsrt  r‘lP   ctstPc'    sz•P   nr’r‘11niPrJ      K/fnrPn\7Pr     
nn1\/   nnP     nsrtir‘1P   r‘sn
occupy  any  given  state.  There  are

Section  S.4:      u‹unum St itistic il Mecl›o›iics          235
ways  to choose  the  Nil  occupied  states  in  the  nth  bin,²'  so

Q(Nl•  N›.    /\/3• --    )  —
ii=   l
{5.75]
(Check  it for the example  in Section 5.4.1 —see Problem  5.24.)
The  calculation  is  hardest  for  the  case  of  ideiiticnl  bosoms.  Again,  the  syin- 
metrization  requirement  means  that  there  is  just  one  N-particle  state  in  which  a 
specific  set of one-particle  states are occupied,  but  this  time there is  no restriction

bin   the question  becomes:  How  many  different  ways can  we assign  N„ identical particles  to 
 d„  different  slots?  There  are  many  tricks  to  solve  this  combinatorial problem; an 
especially  clever method is as follows: Let dots represent particles and



would  indicate  that  there are two particles  in  the  first  state, one in  the second,  three 
in  the  third,  one  in  the  fourth,  and  none  in  the  fifth.  Note  that  there  are  Nd,  
dots, and  (did  —  I j  crosses  (partitioning   the  dots  into  did   groups).  If   the  
individual  dots and crosses  were labeled, there  would be (Nil  +   did  —  l)  ! different  ways 
to arrange them. But for our purposes  the dots are all equivalent—permuting them ‹N„  ! ways) does 
not change the state. Likewise, the crosses are all equivalent—permuting them ((d„  —  1)!  ways) 
changes  nothing.  So  there  are  in  fact

N„!(‹/„  — 1)!
distinct  ways of assigning  the  N„ particles  to the d„  one-particle  states  in  the with bin, 
and  we conclude  that

Q(N  . N z, N;.... )                                                             [5.77]

(Check  it for the Example  in Section  5.4.1—see  Problem  5.24.)

aProblem 5.24  Check  Equations  5.74,  5.75,  and  5.77,  for  the  example  in  Sec-


s +Prob1em 5.25  Obtain  Equation  5.76  by  induction.  The conibinatorial question  is this: How 
many different  ways can you put  N  identical  balls into d  baskets (never

-*This  should  be  xero.  of course.  it‘ Not   >   d,i .  and  it  i.s.  providcd  we  consider  
thc  f‹iciorial  of  a
negative  integer  to  be  infinite.


236          Chapter  S     Identical  Particles

mind the subscript ii for this problem). You could stick all  N  of them into the third basket, or 
all  but one in  the second  basket  and  one in  the fifth, or two in  the first and  three in the 
third  and  all  the rest in  the seventh, etc. Work it out explicitly  for

deduce  the  general  formula.


5.4.3  The Most Probable Configuration

number  N  is equally  likely.  So  the itiost pi obcible  eonfigm ction  (N1. N2  N3,       ) is  
the one  that  can  be  achieved  in  the  largest  number  of  different  ways—it  is that

the constraints



and




subject  to  the constraints  .fi (xi ..  2 • .<3 • ...)  =  0,  ft(•<l• .<2. i                     
 tc.,  iS most conveniently  handled by the method of Lagrange multipliers.'   We introduce


[5,80]

and set af/  its derivatives  equal  to zero:

[5.81]

In  our  case  it's  a  little  easier  to  work  with  the  logaritltin  of  Q,   instead  of Q   
’itself—this  turns  the  pro‹lttcts   into  suitis.  Since  the  logarithm  is  a  munotonic 
function  of  its  arq•unient,  the  maxima  of  O  and  ln(O)  occur  at  the same  point.  So we  
let
[5.82]




New  York  (1983),  Chapter 4. Section  9.

Section S.4:  Qiia›ituin Statistical Mecha›iics         237
where  e   and  Q  are  the  Lagrange  multipliers.  Setting  the  derivatives  with  respect to  a 
  and  Q  equal  to  zero  merely  reproduces  the  constraints  (Equations  5.78  and 5.79);  it  
remains,  then,  to  set  the  derivative  with  respect  to  Ni,  equal  to  zero.
If  the particles  are distingtii.slitible, then  Q  is given  by Equation 5.74.  and  we

have
G  —— 1n(N!) +   J2   [N„ 1n(d„) — 1n(N„ !)]



Assuming  the relevant occupation  numbers (N„) are large, we can invoke Stirling's 
approximation:-*









It  follows  that
+  In(N!) -l- a  N  +  Q €.

=  1n(d„)  — ln         — a  — |3 E„.
[5.85]

[5.86)

Setting  this equal  to zero, and solving for  Nil, we conclude  that  the mast  piobnble
ocCtfpntioii  it,tinibei s, for distinguishable  particles,  are


If  the  particles  are  ideiiiiCff//eririioiis,  then  Q  is  given  by  Equation  5.75,  and we  
have


[5.88]



-Stirling‘s  approximation  can  be  improved  by  including  more  terlns  in  the Stirling  
series.  but the  fir.st  two  will  sul'fice  for  our  purposes.  See  Gcorge  Arffien  and  Hans 
 Jurgen  Weber.  Matlteittaticnl Metltcids for  Plt ysici.sis, 5th ed.. Academic Press, Orlando 
(2000). Section  10.3. 11“ the 1 elevant occupation numbers are ii‹›t  farce—as in Scction  5.4.1 
—then statistical  mechanics simply doesn't apply. The whole point  is  to deal  with  such  
enormous  numbers  thut  statistical  inlcrcnce  is  a reliable  pret!ictor.  Of  cour.se. there 
will always be one-particle  states of extremely  high clicrgy  thilt ilfC BOt    O5Hlated at oll: 
fortunately. Stirling's  approximation  holds  also for    =   0. I  use the word “relevant”  to 
exclude  any  stray states right itt  l)2C  Oldfgin.  lor  which  /\f„  is  neither  huge  nor  
zero.

238         Ch iptei  S    Ideiitic il Pnt•ticles


that Stirling's  approximation  applies  to both  terms. In  that  case

1n(J„ !) —  N„ I R(N,  ) +   N,  — (   „  —  N„) 1n(d„  —  N„)

+ (d,  —  Nil) — a Nil  — § E„N„   + a N +  ) E,


=  — 1n(N„) +  ln(d„  —  N„) — a  — § E„.                    [°i.90]

Setting this equal to zero, and solving for Nil, we find the most probable occupation


[5.91)

Finally, if the particles are identicnl bosons, then  Q is given by Equation  5.77,




G  =        (ln[(N„ -I- d„  — 1)!) — 1n(N, !) — ln[(d„  — 1) !])
»= 1

+  •    N—   IN N     -I- §   E —Z      N! E!!

Assuming  (as always)  that  N„1     1,  and  using Stirling's  approximation:

G    Z      ^„ +d„ — 1) In(N„  +  d„ —  I) —   N„ +  d„  — 1) —  N„ 1n(N„)
»=l


SO
=  ln(N„ +  d„ —  I) — ln(N„)  — a   —    Ez.


[5.92)






[5.93]



[5.94)


"’ln one  dimension  the  mercies  are  nondegenerate  (see  Problem  2.45).  but  in  three  
dimensions rf„  typically  increases  rapidly  with  increasing  o  (for  example,  in  the  case  
ol’ hydrogen,  ‹f„  =   n-).   So

d„  is certainly  not  much  greater  ihan  Nil  ai  absolute  zero,  where  all  states  up  to  
the  Fermi  level  are filled,  and  hence d    ——  N  . Here again  we are rescued  by  the fact  
that Stirling's  formula  holds also  for

Section  5.4:  Quantum  Statistical Mechanics          239

Setting this equal to zero, and solving for N„, we find the most probnble occupation iitunl›ei.s  
for  identical  bosons:

5.95

(For consistency  with  the approximation  already  invoked  in the case of fermions, we should  
really  drop  the  I  in the  numerator,  and  I shall  do so from  now on.)


Problem 5.26  Use  the  method  of  Lagrange  multipliers  to  find  the  rectangle  of

(.v Ja)- + (   JI›)-      1. What  is that  maximum  area?




(a)   Find  the percent  error  in Stirling's  approximation  for z =  10.
(b)   What  is the smallest  integer z such  that  the error is less than  1%?


5.4.4  Physical Significance of e  and $
The parameters  a  and     came into the  story  as Lagrange  multipliers,  associated with  the.  
tnta1  ntimhpr nf nnrtir1es  nnrl  the.  tnta1  eneryy   respectively   Mnthemnti- cally. they are 
determined  by substituting  the occupation  numbers (Equations  5.87, 5.91,  and  5.95)  back  
into  the constraints  (Equations  5.78  and  5.79).  To carry  out

degeneracies  (r/„),  for  the potential  in  question.  As  an example,  I'll  work  out  the case 
of an ideal gas—a large number of noninteracting particles, all with the same

inte   retation  of  o  and
In  Section  5.3.1  we found  the allowed  energies  (Equation 5.39):





where
E  --’-,
2»

an,xn „
[5.96]


As before,  we convert  the sum  into an integral,  treating  k  as a continuous  variable, with  
one  state (or,  for spin .i, 2s -1- 1  states) per  volume  u"/  V  of k-space.  Taking

as our “bins”  the spherical  shells in the first  octant  (see Figure 5.4), the “degener-


k‘’ ‹lk.                               [5.97]

For  distinguishable  particles  (Equation  5.87),  the  first  constraint  (Equation  5.78)
becoiiies

V
N                e               e   *’    ‘’  !’     k
dk —— Ve  “

2x              TO
SO

e“
\2.§. ›



[5.98]

The second  constraint  (Equation  5.79) says


e  !"°" ‘" ’““k’ dk  ——

or, putting  in Equation  5.98 for e  ° :
—e
2$     2r$fi*-



(If you include the spin factor, 2.s +  1, in Equation 5.97, it cancels out at this point, so 
Equation 5.99 is correct  for all spins.)

averaee  kinetic enerev of an atom  at  teinnerature  T:'⁷

—k B T.                                                     [5.100]
N       2
where  I-B  is the Boltzinann constant. This suggests  that $  is related  to the temper -
ntwe:

  1  
kBT
[5.101]
To  prove  that  this  holds  in  general,  and  not  simply  for  distinguishable  particles in  
the  three-dimensional infinite  square  well,  we  would  have  to demonstrate  that

Q. The argument  is sketched  in  many  books."  but 1 shall  not  reproduce  it  here—I will  
simply  adopt  Equation  5.101  as  the defiiiition  of  T.

—7See.  for example.  David  Halliday,  Robert Resnick. -and  Jearl  Walker.  Fimtlaitienlals of 
Phy.Vics.
5th ed.,  Wiley,  New  Yot k  (1997).  Section  20-5.
See.  lor exarrlplc.  Yariv  tfootnote 22).  Section  15.4.

Secliois  S. 4:  Qunntum  Statistical  Meclninics           241

It  is  customary   to  replace  o   (which,  as  is  clear  from  the  special  case  of Equation  
5.98, is a function  of  T)  by  the so-called  chemical  potential,

f5.1021

and  rewrite   Equations   5.d7,  5.91,  and  5.95  as  tormulas   for‘   the  most  pi obable 
m,iinb£'i“  Of pai-ticles  i,ii  a  ›‹ii licalni  (oiie-pm title)  state  wit/?  eiiei g›• c  (to  
go  from the  number  of  particles   with  a  given  enerp•y   to  the  number  of   particie.s   
in  a particular   state   with   that   energy,   we  simply   divide   by   the  degeneracy   of  
 the




e°"          "^ T           MAXWELL-BOLTZMANN

FERMI—DIRAC

BOSE-EINSTEIN


         [5.103]            


The  Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution  is  the classical  result,  for  distiii,¿ui,sltable

Einstein distribution  is for i leitticnl bosons.
The Fermi-Dirac  distribution  has a particularly  simple  behavior as T  —+  0:

if e  <
if c  >  y(0),


0,                                                        [5.104)

All  states are filled, up to an energy q(0), and none are occupied for energies above this (Figuie 
5.8). Evidently  the chemical  potential  at absolute zero is precisely  the Femii energy:
(0) =   E F •                                                    [5.105)

As the temperature  rises, the Femii-Dirac distribution  “softens”  the cutoff, as indi- cated  by  
the  rounded  curve  in Figure  5.8.
Returning now to the special case of an ideal gas, foi  distinguishable particles we found  that  
the  total  energy  at  temperature  T  is (Equation  5.99)

3
— Nk B T.                                                           [5,106)
2

242           Cl  anter  S     ldentic.al  Particles





T> 0






FIGURE 5.8:    Fermi-Dirac distribution  for T = 0 and for T somewhat above zero.

while (from  Equation  5.98) the chemical  potential  is


;x(T)      kBT    ln    N
3 ln     2x/i   

[5.107]
V   +    2   tiikBT

T  wnMlrl  like  tn  wnrk  mil   the   rnrresnnnrliny  fnrnwdns  fnr  nn  irIen1  gns   nf   
iclention I
fermions and bosons, using Equations 5.91 and 5.95 in place of Equation 5.87. The first constraint  
(Equation  5.78)  becomes

N  —                                                     ‹Ik.                    [5.108)

f ix/1 th    th  e   ril i i c   c i em    frnr  ferrri i run k    i rat    rvri rri i c   frnr  
hrnc run c \    n ri ri   the     ce  r•inia ri   r•rnri ctrn i n t
(Equation  5.79)  reads


— 2s-  ? 2f7J    0     el(*°
k’                 dk.
1

[5.109]

i ne  first  of   tnese  determines       1 ),  and  the  second  determines  k (1 )  (mom  the 
latter we obtain,  for instance,  the heat  capacity:  C  =   S £/S T).  Unfortunately, these 
integrals  cannot  be evaluated  in  term.s of  elementary  functions,  and  I  shall  leave it for 
you  to explore  the  matter further (see Problems 5.28  and 5.29).

Problem 5.28  Evaluate  the integrals  (Equations  5.108  and 5.109)  for  the  case of
identical  fermions  at  absolute  zero. Compare  your results  with Equations 5.43 and
5.45.  (Note  that  for electrons  there  is  an  extra  factor  of  2 in Equations  5.108  and 
5.109,  to account  for  the  spin  degeneracy.)



Sectioit  5.4:  Ouaiitiim Statistical Mechanics        243



(a)   Show  that  for  bosons  the  chemical  potential  must  always  be  less  than  the
minimum  allowed  energy.  Hint:  ii (c) cannot  be  negative.

case    (T)   monotonically  increases  as T  decreases,  assuming  N  and  Y  are held constant.  
Hiiit:  Study  Equation  5.108,  with  the  minus sign.
(c)   A crisis (called Bose condensation)  occurs when  (as we lower T)  y(F)  hits
e in egra                                 in                            e en ica

pmticles crowd into the ground state, and the calculational device of replacing the  discrete  sum  
(Equation  5.78)  by  a  continuous  integral  (Equation  5.108)


5.110

where  r   is  Euler's  gamma  function  and  §  is  the  Riemann  zeta function.
Look  up  the  appropriate  numerical  values.
(d)   Find   the  critical  temperature  for  4He.  Its  density,  at  this  temperature,  is
in   He is 2.17  K. The  remarkable  properties  of  4He in  the  neighborhood  of
T, are discussed  in  the reference  cited  in footnote  29.


5.4.5  The Blackbody Spectrum
Photons  (quanta  of  the electronngnetic field) are identical  bosons  with spin  1,  but they  a 
e very  spec al    ecausc   hey  a e    ns     s   partic e    and   e  ce  H     ns cally

that  do  not  belong  to nonrelativistic quantum  mechanics:



E  =  /i r  =  /:w.
2.  The  wave  number  k  is related  to  the frc  uenc        1  =  2s c  is the speed  of  light.

where
3.  Only  two  spin  states  occur  (the  quantum  number  nT  can  be  -l-1  or  —1,  but not  0).

4.  The  iiifPfbei‘  of  photons  is  not  a  conserved  quantity;  when  the  temperature

In  view  of  item  4,  the  first  constraint  (Equation  5.78)  does  not  apply.  We can  take  
account  of  this  by  simply  setting  a   —+  0,  in  Equation  5.82  and  every- thing  that  
follows.  Thus  the  most  probable  occupation   number,  for  photons,  is
(Equation  5.95):
dz                                                 [5.111]
For free photons in a  box of  volume  Y. $k  is given  by Equation  5.97,"0  multiplied by  2 for 
spin  (item  3), and expressed  in  terms of  c› instead  of  k  (item  2):

              2 du›.                                         [5.112]

So  the energy  density,  Npliu›/ V,  in  the frequency  range du›, is  p(u›) du›, where





i nis  is  riancK  S  I8mOUs  iormuia  ior  me  DiacxDooy  spectrum,  giving  tne  energy per  unit 
 volume,  per unit  frequency,  for  an  electromagnetic  field  in  equilibrium  at temperature  
T.   It  is plotted,  for  three  different  temperatures,  in Figure 5.9.

Problem 5.30
(a)   Use Equation  5.113 to determine  the energy  density  in the ivn›!eleiigtlt  range
clZ.   Hiitt:  Set  p(‹») du› ——  p(Z) dZ, and  solve for  p(L).
(b)   Derive  the  Wien  displacement  law  for  the  wavelength  at  which  the  black-



2.90 x  10      inK
'"'                   T

[5.114)
Hiiit:   You'll   need   to  solve   the  transcendental  equation   (.5  —  .r)   ==  5e   ", 
usinp•  a calculator  or a comnuter:  eet  the numerical  answer accurate  to  three significant  
digits.



"'In  truth.  we  have  no  business   using  this  formula.  which  came  from  the  
(nonrclativistic) Schrriclinpcr  equation:   Lori un:itcly,   the  degeneracy   is  ex‹ictly   tlme 
 same  for  the  i elativistic  case.  See Problem  5.36.








1.6

1.4  —                      /

1.2 —

1.0  —




0.6-
<         Visible region





bUUU C







’0         2         4                   6                       8
requency

FIGURE 5.9:    Planck's formula for the blackbody spectrum, Equation 5.113.


Problem .$.31  Derive the Stefan-Boltzmann formula for the torn/  energy density in  blackbody  
radiation:





to eva uate  t  e integra               at



FURTHER PROBLEMS FOR CHAPTER S                                                       


dimensional  harmonic  oscillator  potential  (Equation  2.43). If one  is in  the ground state,  
and  the  other  is  in  the  first  excited  state,  calculate  ((.r   — .r›)'),  assuming

246           Chatter  S     lclentical  Pat ticles

identical  femiions.  Ignore  spin  (if  this  bothers  you,  just  assume  they  are  both  in


Problem 5.33  Suppose  you  have  three  particles,  and  three  distinct  one-particle states  
(Jq(.x),  /¿(.r),  and  /,.(.r))  are  available.  How  many  different  three-particle states  can 
 be  constructed,  (a)  if  they  are  distinguishable  particles,  (b)  if  they  are identical  
bosons,  (c)  if  they  are  identical  fermions?  (The  particles  need  not  be  in different  
states—4. (<l)/›(.r2)/„(.v3)would  be one possibility. if the particles are oistinguisnafiie.)

Problem  5.34  Calculate  the  Fermi  energy  for  noninteractinp  electrons  in  a  nrf9- 
dimensional  infinite  square  well. Let  ‹r  be  the  number  of  free electrons  per  unit area.

a a aProblem  5.35  Certain  cold stars (called white dwarfs) are stabilized against grav- 
itational  collapse  by  the  degeneracy  pressure  of  their  electrons  (Equation  5.46). 
Assuming  constant  density,  the  radius  R  of  such  an  object  can  be  calculated  as

(a)   Write  the  total  electron  energy  (Equation  5.45)  in  terms  of  the  radius,  the 
nulTlber  of  nucleons  tnrotons  and  neutronsl  N.   the  number  of  electrons  ner nucleon  q.  
and  the  mass  of  the electron  th.
(b)   Look  up.  or calculate,  the  gravitational  energy  of  a uniformly  dense  sphere. Express 
 your  answer  in  terms  or  n   ttne  constant  or  universal  gravitation),

iiegnti›'e.
(c)  Find the radius for which the total energy, (a) plus (b), is a minimum.  Aris   ei .

R          4            Gllf     'N    '“ ”
(Note that  the iadiu.s  dec i enses  as  the  total  mass  inc.re ise.s !) Put  in  the actual 
numbers,  for everything  except  N,  using  q  ——  1/2 (actually,  q decreases  a bit as  the  
atomic  number  increases,  but  this  is  close  enough  for our  purposes). Aiisii•ei.   R  —— 
7.6  x  10‘"N    l  "  m.

.SUIT.
(e)  Determine  the  Ferml  energy,  in  electron  volts,  for  the  white  dwarf  ln  (d), and  
colnpare  it  with  the  rest  energy  of  an  electron.  Note  that  this  system  is gcvtnig  
u‹ingci urisiy  rci‹iiivisiic  tscc  rrufiiciii  ii.ooj.

ffJm/7er Problems [or Cl›‹i|›ter 5        247


s s sProblem 5.36  We  can extend  the  theory  of  a free electron  gas (Section  5.3.1)  to the 
relativistic domain  by  replacing  the classical  kinetic energy,  E  ——  /›-/2iii,  with the  
relativistic  formula,  €  =         ! c   +  nI -C    — /I7f'.  MOlnentum  is  related  to  the 
wave  vector  in  the  usual  way:  p  =   Ark.  In  particular,  in  the  e. tieme  relativistlC

(a)   Replace  ñ²k-’/2iii in  Equation  5.44  by  the  ultra-relativistic expression,  /:c I,


Notice  that  in  this  case  there  is  no  stable  minimums,  regardless  of  fi:  if  the total 
energy is positive, degeneracy  forces exceed gravitational  forces, and the star will expand,  
whereas if the total  is negative,  gravitational  forces  win out, and  the star will collapse.  
Find  the critical  number of nucleons,  N,,   such  that gravitational  collapse occurs  for  N  > 
 N, . Thls 1s called  the Chandrasekhar limit.  Answer:  2.04  x  1057.  What  is  the  
corresponding   stellar  mass  (give your answer  as a multiple of the sun's mass).  Stars heavier  
than  this will not
form  whlte  dwarfs,  but  collapse  further,  becoming  (if  conditions  are  right)
neutron  stars.
(c)   At  extremely  high density.  inverse  beta  decay,  e*  +  y“   —+  ii -}- v, converts 
virtually  all  of  the  protons  and  electrons  into  neutrons  fliberatinp•  neutrinos. which 
carry off energy,  in the process). Eventually  iieiiti oit  degeneracy  pres- sure  stabilizes  
the  collapse,  just  as  electi on  degeneracy  does  for  the  whltC dwarf  (see  Problem  5.35). 
 Calculate  the  radius  of  a  neutron  star  with  the mass  of  the  sun.  Also  calculate  the  
(neutron)  Fermi  energy,  and  compare it  to  the  rest  energy  of  a  neutron.  Is  it  
reasonable  to  ti‘eat  a  lieutron  star


s  s  sProblem 5.37
(a)   Find the chemical  potential and the total energy for distinguishable particles in the three 
dimensional  harmonic oscillator potential (Problem  4.38). Hiiit:  The

need  to use an integral  approximation, as we did for the infinite square well. Note that  by 
differentiating  the geometric  series,



you  can get


r/x     1 — .r

ii=  l

248           Chapter 5    ldetitical P‹irti€fes

and  similar  results  for higher derivatives.  Aitsi‹!ei.

[5.117]


(c)   Discuss  the  classical  limit,  kBT          in›,  to  the  light  of  the  equipartition 
theorem.³'   How  many   degrees  of  freedom   does  a  particle  in  the  three dimensional  
harmonic  oscillator  possess?






























' Sec.  liar  e.xiunp1e,  Halliday  and Resnick  (tootnote  27).  Section  20-9.








CHAPTER  I

TIME-INDEPENDENT PERTURBATION  THEORY





6.1.1  General Formulation
Suppose  we  have  solved  the  (time-independent)  Schrodinger  equation  for  so1ne
potential  (say,  the one-dimensional infinite  square  well):

[6.1]

obtaining  a complete  set of orthonormal  eigenfunctions, J0,



and  the corresponding  eigenvalues  E0. Now  we perturb  the potential slightly  (say, the new 
eigenfunctions and eigenvalues:
[6.3]

Ult  £ll1)âSS  \¥'ti  il]’ti   ’cry  lricky,  we’re  not  going  to  be able  to solve  the 
Schrddiliger equation  exactly,  for  this  liaore  compiicateñ  potentlal.  Ferturiiation  theory  
is  a systematic  procedure for obtainin=‘    PPl‘o.ximare solutions to the perturbed  problem, by  
building  on the known  exact  solutions  to the uuyeiturhecl  case.


250        Chapter 6    Titos-Jrdeperderi Perturhutioti  T/›eory
















FIGURE 6.1:    Infinite square well with small perturbation.

To  begin  with  we write  the  new  Hamiltonian  as the suin of  two  tems:



where  If’ is  the  perturbation  (the  superscript  0 always  identifies  the  unperturbed
en   we
up to 1, and  H  will  be the  true  Hamiltonian.  Next  we write  J„   and  E„ as power series in  
X:

[6.5]


Here £,l   is the first-order correction to the with eigenvalue, and J,l   is the first-order 
correction  to the with eigenfunction;  E   and       are the second-order  corrections,

Section 6.1:  Nondegenerate  Pertorfinfi,oii Theot  y          251

To  lowest  order'  (X0) this  yields  HOJ     =   €J J0, which  is  nothing  new  (Equa- tion 
6.1). To first order (X'),

[6.7)


[6.8]
and  so  on.  (I’m  done  with  X,  now—it  was  jrist  a  device  to  keep  track  of  the 
different  orders—so  crank it  up to 1.)



Talung  the  inner  product  of  Equation  G 7  with  J*   (that  is,  mulaplying  by  (JJ)‘ and  
integratinqe),


Btlt  If'    is  hermitian,  so


and  this cancels  the first  term  on  the right. Moreover,  (J0 |J0)     1, so-

6.9]

This  is  the  fundamental  result  of  first-order  perturbatlon  theory;  as  a  yr actical 
matter,  it  may  well  be  the  most  important  equation  in  quantum  mechanics.  It says  that  
the  first-order  correction  to  the  energy  is  the  ex›ec’tntion  value  of  the perturbation,  
in the i,uq›ei ttii bed  state.

Example 6.1    The  unperturbed   wave  functions  for  the  infinite  square  well  are (Equation  
2.28)





' In  this  context  it  doesn't  matter  whether  we  write    J,0,  f;f’/   )  or‘  (/„   
|ff'|/,0, )  (with  the extra vert ical  bar).  because  we  are  using  the  wave  l'unction  
itself  to “label”  the  state.  But  the  latter  notation is  yrclcr‹ihtc,  because  it  trccs  
us  frunl  this  sgccif c  ccnvcn\ iun.

252          Chapter 6    Tfme-liidepeiideiit Perfi‹rfiafio›i Theor)'















FIGURE 6.2:    Constant perturbation over the whole well.

Suppose  we perturb  the system  by simply  raising the “floor”  of  the well a constant
amount  Vo  (Figure 6.2). Find  the first-order  correction  to the energies.
SolutiOfl:  ln  thls case  H'  =  V , dlJd  the first-Ol der correction  to the energy  of  the
with  state  is


The corrected energy  levels. then, are £„     £0  + Vo: they are simply  lifted  by the aluount  
*0-  Of ‹your se! The only surprising  thing  is that  in this case the first-order theory yields 
the e.v th   answer. Evidently  for a cotistatit  perturbation  all the higher corrections  
vanish.-’  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  perturbation  extends  only  half-way across the well 
(Figure 6.3), then


p              2 V0      °
0

Sin
2 ('       g.)
2
In  this  cure  every  energy  level  is  lifted  by  °0/2.  That's  not  the  e.ract   result, 
presumably.  but  it does seem  reasonable,  a.s a first-ordei  approximation.

Equation  6.9  is  the  first-order  correction  to  the  enei‘g;‘,  to  find  the  first-order 
correction  to  the  ›vave/i‹nriion  we  first  rewrite  Equation  6.7:

[6.10)

- Incidentally.  nothing  here depends  on  the .specific  nature  ol‘ the  infinite  square  
well—the  same holds  for ring   potential.  when  the  pelturbation  is  const‹int.



Section 6.1:  Noiidegeiiernt,e Pertut bation Tl eor;          253















FIGURE 6.3:    Constant perturbation  over half the well.

The right site is a knnwn function  en this amounts tn an inhnmo•enentis clifferentia1 equation  
for  J,l, Now,  the unperturbed  wave  functions  constitute  a complete set, so J,$  (like any 
other function) can  be expressed as a linear combination  of  them:

[6.1 l]

There is no need  to include ni  =  n in the sum, for if  J,   satisfies Equation  6.10, so too 
does (J,   -1- a  J0). for any constant  n, and  we can  use this freedom  to subtract off  the  J0 
  term."  If  we could  determine  the coefficients  r)  ’, we‘d  be done.
Well  netting Fn,iiatinn  fi  ) 1  intn Fn,iiatinn  fi  1 g   ancI using the fnrt thnf  fhe   /r0
satisfies  the unperturbed  Schrodinger  equation  (Equation  6.1), we have



Taking  the inner  product  with  J0,




"Alternatively,  a  p•lance  zi  Equation  6.5  reveals  that  any  90   component  in  9,|   might 
 ‹is  well be pulled  out  and  combined  with  the first  term.  In  fact,  the choice ‹ ,"   =  0 
ensures  thal  J/„ — with  l
as  the  coefficient  of           in  Equation  6.5— is  iirzi‘niafi:.ref   (to  first  order  in  
Z):   ({/„ |/„)   =    {9   1|/*)

If(9,  |/0) +  {/0|p,| )) +-
I   (--    ) +
- .  but  the  ortiionorinalily  of  the  unperturbed  states  means  that
the  first  term  is  1  and  (/,) |9  ') =  (9„ |/,) )  =   0.  as  long  as  9,    has  nt›  /    
 component.






If /  =  ii, the left side is zero, and  we recover  Equation  6,9; if 1 -/- ii,  we get








SO
0               0
[6.13]



Notice  that  the denominator  is safe  (since  there  is  no coefficient  with  ni  =  n) a.s

egg
g    s    e       er           e
3  syec i um  is  non  egenei a e.    u   i    wo    i  eren

zero to get Equation  6.12); in that case we need degenerate  perturbation  theory,
which  I'll come to in Section  d.2.
That  completes  first-order  perturbation  theory:  The  first-order  correction  to the  energy,  
£, ,  is  given  by  Equation  6.9,  and  the  first-order  correction  to  the wave  function,  
J,l ,  is  given  by  Equation  6.13. 1 should  warn  you  that  whereas



aProblem 6.1  Suppose  we  put a delta-function  bump  in  the center  of  the  infinite square  we

H’ —— a6(x  — ri /2),
where a  is a constant.
(a)  Find the first-order correction  to the allowed energies. Explain  why the ener- gies are not  
perturbed  for even ii.
(b)  Find  the  first  three  nonzero  tenns  in  the  expansion  (Equation  6.13)  of  the 
correction  to the ground  state,  /J'.

aProblem  6.2  For  the  harmonic  oscillator  [V(.x)  =   (l /2)kx-],  the  allowed  ener- gies  
are

n =  0
where  in  =        /     is  the  classical  frequency.  Now  suppose  the spring  constant 
increases  slightly:  k       (1 +  e)k. (Perhaps  we cool  the spring, so it becomes  less 
flexible.)

Section 6.1:  No›idegeiieroie Perturhntion  TfieorJ›         255

(a)  Find  the exact  new  energies (trivial,  in  this case). Expand  your formula  as a power 
series  in e, up  to second  order.
(b)  Now calculate  the first-order  perturbation  in the energy,  using Equation  6.9. What  is  
R'   here?  Compare  your  result  with  part (a).  ffiP/.'  It  is  not  neces- sary—in fact, it 
is not Jeer minted —to calculate a single integral  in doing this problem.

wo                    oso                                               e   s
(Equation  2.19). They  interact  weakly  with one another,  via the potential


(where   +0  is  a  constant   with  the  dimensions  of  energy,   and  a   is  the  width  of e  
we
(a)   First,  ignoring   the  interaction   between  the  particles,   find  the  ground  state and 
  the   first   excited   state—both   the   wave   functions   and   the   associated energies.
(b)   Use  first-order  perturbation   theory  to  estimate  the  effect  of  the  particle- 
particle  interaction  on  the energies  of  the  ground  state  and  the  first  excited state.


6.1.3  Second-Order Energies
Proceeding   as  before,   we  take  the  inner  product  of  the   second   order  equation 
(Equation  6.8) with       :


Again,  we exploit  the  hermiticity  of  H⁰:



(J0 |J0) = 1. and  we are left  with a formula for  €  :

[6.14]

But






(because  the sum excludes ni  — ii, and  all  the others  are orthogonal),  so




na  y.

E           „

This  is the fundamental  result of second-order  perturbation  theory. Equation  6.15 is 
ordinarily  as  far as  it  is  useful  to pur.sue  this method.⁵
+Problem 6.4
(a)   Find   the   second-order   correction   to   the   energies   (E   )   for   the   potential
in  Problem 6.1.   CoiniHenr:   You   can   sum   the   series   explicitly,   obtaining 
2iit(o/Clin)'  for odd  ii.
(b)  Calculate the second-order correction  to the ground  state energy (ñ   ) for the potential  
in  Problem  6.2. Check  that  your  result  is consistent  with  the  exact solution.

s   Problem 6.5  Consider  a charged  particle  in  the one-dimensional harmonic  oscil- lator 
potential.  Suppose  we turn on a weak electric  field  (€), so that  the  potential




"In  the short-hand  notation  I* to the with energy  are
-   £0, —  E0. the  first  three  corrections





The   third  order  correction   is  given  in  Landau   and  Lifschitz.   Qiiantunt   Mecltmiics:  
Non-Rvlatixistic Theory.  3rd  ed..  Pergamon.  Oxford  (1977).  page   136:  the  fourth   and  
fifth  orders  (together   with  a nowerful   general   technique   for  obtaining   the   higher  
orders)   are  develoncd   by   Nicholas   Wheeler, Hizli‹•i -Ordrr  Syf•Gtlal  Pc•rtiii l›atioit   
(unpublished   Reed  College  report.   2000).  I lluniinating   alterna- tive   formu lotions   of 
  time-independent  perturbation   theory   include   the  Delgarno-Lewis  method   and the  
closely  related  “logarithmic”   perturbation   theory  (see.  for  examplc,  T.  Iliibo  and  U.  
Sukhatme. Am.  J.  Ph;s.  52.  1 fiO ( 1984),  liar LPT.  and  H.   Mavroinatis.  Atit.  J.  Ph;  
s.  59,  738  ( 1991 ),  for  Delgarno- Lewis).

Section 6.2:  Degenerate  Perturbation Theory         257

(a)  Show  that  there  is  no first-order  change  in  the energy  levels,  and  calculate the 
second-order  correction.  ffiiir: See  Problem  3.33.
(b)  The Schrodinger  equation  can be solved directly  in this case, by a change of are consistent 
 with  the perturbation  theory approximation.



If  the  unperturbed  states  are  degenerate—that  is,  if  two  (or  more)  distinct  states (J0  
and  /0) share  the  same enerp•y—then  ordinary  perturbation  theory  fails:  c  " (Equation  
6.12)  and  E ¿  (Equation  6.15)  blow  up  (unless,  perhaps,  the  numerator vanishes,  1/  I 
H'|/     =  0—a loophole that  will be important  to us later on). In the degenerate case, 
therefore,  there is no reason to trust even the@.ii-order correction to  the energy  (Equation  
6.9),  and  we  must  look  for some  other  way  to handle  the problem.

6.2.1  Two-Fold Degeneracy
Suppose  that
[6.16]

with  J0  and J0  both normalized. Note that any linear combination  of  these states,

[6.17]


[6.l8J
Typically,  the  perturbation  (If’)  will  “break”  (or  “lift”)  the  degeneracy:  As  we 
increase  X  (from  0  to  l),  the  common  unperturbed  energy  £⁰  splits  into  two (Figure  
6.4).  Going  the  other  direction,  when  we  turn  oJ   the  perturbation,  the “upper”  state  
reduces  down  to  one  linear  combination  of  J0    and  J0, and  the “lower” state reduces to 
some or tliogonnl  linear combination,  but we don't know a

calculate  the @ st-order energy  (Equation  6.9)—we  don't  know  what  unperturbed states to  
use.
For  the  moment,  therefore,  let's  just  write  the  “good”  unperturbed  states  in generic  
form  (Equation  6.17),  keeping  a  and  Q  adjustable.  We  want  to solve  the Schrddinp•er  
equation,
[6.19]





















1

FIGURE 6.4:     “Lihing” of  a degeneracy  by  a perturbation.

with  ff  =  ff⁰ + Xff' and


Plugging  these  into  Equation  6.19,  and  collecting  like  powers  of  X  (as  before)



But  N'f   0  =  £⁰J0 fEquation  6.1fi), so the first  terms cancel; at order X   we have


Taking  the inner  product  with      :


Because   N0  is  hermitian,  the  first  term  on  the  left  cancels  the  first  term  on the  
right.  Putting  in  Equation  6.17  and  exploiting  the  orthonormality  condition (Equation 
6.16),  we obtain




or,  more compactly,


where

[6.22)

[6.23)


Sectiotf  6.2:  Degenerate  Perfnrfiniior  Theos›          259

Similarly,  the  inner  product  with  J0   yields

[6.24]

Notice  that  the  lV's are (in  principle) knzn'o —they  are just the “matrix  ele- ments”  of  
R’, with  respect  to the unperturbed  wave functions  J0   and  J0. Multi- plying Equation  6.24 
by  lV„ „  and using Equation  6.22 to eliminate  Q lVp¿,  we  find:



If £f  is i7oi  zero, Equation  6.25 yields an equation  for  £'  :

6.26

Invoking  the quadratic  fonnula,  and  noting  (front Equation  6.23) that W„,      lY,*„ we 
conclude  that





This  is  the  fundmnental  result  of  degenerate  perturbation  theory:  the  two  roots 
correspond  to the  two perturbed  energies.
But  what  if  a   is  zero?  In  that  case  Q  =   1,  Equation  6.22  says  Wqb       0, and 
Equation  6.24 gives  £'   =  IV». This is actually  included  in the general  iesult (Equation  
6.27),  with  the  nunus sign (the plus sign corresponds  to n =  1, Q =  0). What's  more,  the 
rim.iii•ei s,
_re   +... = ‹t1» ltd).   «  — ».›. = ‹tfi»’itf).

are precisely  what we would have obtained using non degenerate perturbation theory (Equation  
6.9). We  have  simply  been  luck;-. The  states  J0   and  J0    were ahead› the  “good”  linear 
combinations.  Obviously,  it  would  be  greatly  to our  advantage if  we could  somehow  R'!•›s  
the “good”  states  right front  the start—then  we could zo ahead and use non dep•enerate  
pertuibation  theory.  As it  turns out,  we can  very
often  do this by exploiting  the following  theorem:

Theorem:   Let  A  be a hennitian  operator  that  colTNTlutes  with  H⁰  and  H’. If  J0   and  J0 
  (the degenerate eigenfunctions ot  ff⁰) are also eip•enfunctions of  A, with  distinct 
eigenvalues,



260          C/tester ñ    Tiirie-lndrpeitdent  Perttti‘l›atinn Tlieorv

then  Jf„t  =  0 (and  hence  J0   and  J0   are the “good”  states to use in  pertur-
bation  theory).
y  assumption,                     ,  SO







But         v,  so Why ,     0.    QED

Moral:  If you're faced with degenerate states, look aroulld for some hermitian operator  A  that  
commutes  with  H⁰  and  H';  pick  as  your  unperturbed  states  ones that are simultaneously 
eigenfunctions of  H" and  A. Then  use nrdiii ii    first-order perturbation  theory.  If  you  
can't  find  such  an  operator,  you'll  have  to  resort  to



Problem 6.6   Let  the  two  “good”  unperturbed  states  be



where e2   and $     are determined (up to normalization) by Equation  6.22 (or Equa-

(a)   /0+  are orthogonal  ((/0  |/0)      0):


(c)   (/0   |N' |/0p )  =   EQ    ,  with  £y    given  by  Equation  6.27.


Problem 6.7  Consider  a  particle  of  mass  iii  that  is free  to  move  in a one-dimen- ion     
region  o    eng                    oses  on  ise        or  ins ance,  a    ea                 es 
frictionlessly on a circular  wire  of circumference  L, as in  Problem  2.46).

(a)   Show  that  the  stationary  states  can  be  written  in  the  form

(—L/2  <  x  <  L/2),


Section 6.2:  Degeiiernte  Perttirhation Theor)!         261

where n  =  0,     1,  + 2, ...  , and  the allowed  energies  are




Notice  that—with  the exception  of  the ground  state (ii      0)—these  are all doubly  
degenerate.
(b)  Now suppose  we introduce  the perturbation


where o  44  L.   (This puts a little “dimple” in  the potential  at .i  =  0, as though

E„, using Equation  6.27. Hint: To evaluate the integrals, exploit the fact that a  «   L  to 
extend  the limits from     L/2 to     oo; after all,  if’ is essentially zero outside  —o  < .r  < 
 i.
(c)  What  are the “good”  linear  combinations  of  J„   and      „, for  this  problem?

Equation  6.9.
(d)  Find  a  hermitian  operator  A  that  fits  the  requireiiients of  the  theorem,  and show  
that  the simultaneous  eigenstates  of  H'   and  A are  precisely  the  ones you  use   in


6.2.2  Higher-Order Degeneracy
Tn   fhr•  nrr•v  m»s  sr•ofimn   T  n ssrrnlerl  fhe  rlr•yenernry   wn s  fwm-fn1 rJ,  half   it  
 is   en sy   fn
see  how  the method  generalizes.  Rewrite Equations  6.22 and  6.24 in  matrix  form:

[6.28)

Evidently  the  E 1 ’s   are nothing  but  the e!“RenvaluCS Of  the  IV-matrix;  Equation  6.26
of  the unperturbed  states are the eigenvectors  of  W.
In  the  case  of  It-fold  degeneracy,  we  look  foi  the  eigenvalues  of  the  n  x ii
matrix
6.29

In  the  language  of  linear  algebra,  finding  the “good”  unperturbed  wave functions amounts  
to constructing  a  basis  in  the  degenerate  subspace  that  diagonnlize.s  the

matrix  W. Once again,  if you  can  think  of  an operator  A  that commutes  with
*.n
nutontaticnll›   be  diap•onal,  and  you  won't  have  to  fuss  with  solving  the  charac- 
teristic  equation.6  (If  you're  nervous  about  my  casual  generalization  from  2-fold 
degeneracy  to n-fold  degeneracy,  work  Problem 6.10.)


Example 6.2    Consider the three-dimensional infinite cubical  well (Problem  4.2):

0,      if 0  <  .v  <   a.   0  <  v  <  n,   and  0 <'  <                  [6.30]
no    otherwise.


The stationary  states are

2   «/*
n         sin (    ‹i  i)sn


) sin (       .)  ,       [6.31]
n

where i7. , ii ... and ii - are nositive integers. The corresnondin•p allowed  ener•ies are





dJ7lCf

Notice  that  the ground  state (Ji     ) is nondegenerate: its energy  is



But  the first  excited  state is (triply)  degenerate:

[6.1?]







[6.34]

all share  the same energy
E

Now  let's  introduce  the perturbation

p.  _    *0.    if 0 < .i  <  f/2 and 0 < y  < n/2:
0.     otherwise.


"Degenerate  pertul’  i1(1Of1  theory  arrlounts  to diago@fixation ol‘ the degenerate  pm t o1‘ 
fJflC Hilniil- toni:in.  The  dineonalization  of  matrices  (and  simultann•ous  
diagon•ilizability  of’ coniiaauting  matrices)  is discussed  in  the  Appendix  fsection  A.5).








a        a/2

a/2












FIGURE 6.5:   The perturbation increases the potential by an amount V0 ^  the shaded
sectur.

This raises the potential by an amount  *^0 in one quarter of the box (see Figure 6.5).







— v₀.
4

which  is pretty  much  what  we would  expect.
Sl


[6.37]
For the first excited state we need the full machinery of degenerate perturbation theory. The  
first  step  is to construct  the  matrix  W. The diagonal  elements  are  the same  as  for  the  
ground  state  (except  that  the  argument  of  one  of  the  sines  is doubled);  you  can  check 
 for  yourself  that



The off-diagonal  elements are  more  interesting:

*0         sin
) sin                                                 .r—‹ ) dz.
ci                                                                                ff


264          Chapter  6     Ttme-Independent Perturbation Theory

But  the z  integral  is zero (as it  will be also for  IVR,.),  so
Wqz  =  Jf„,  =  0.

Finall





Thus


I›c  —"

2    3
*0
«/*
x             sin

•l°-
sin

2    Y    sin







1     0    0
0     1      K
0      K



—,')   **








6.38
where  K       (8/3s)'      0.7205.
I he characteristic  equatlon  for  W  (or  rather,  for  4W/ *0.  which  is  easier  to


eigenv           re


lo  first order in  X,  then,


[6.39]
E0     +   L( I  — c)  V0/4.
where  E    is  the  (common)  unperturbed  energy  (Equation  6.35).  The  perturbation
lifts  the degeneracy,  splitting  E0     into three distinct energy  levels (see Figure  6.6).

problem,  we  would  have concluded  that  the  first-order  correction  (Equation  6.9) is the 
same  for all  three states,  and equal  to  VO/4—which is actually  correct  only  for
LllC IIIIUUIC StJLC.
Meanwhile,  the “good”  unperturbed  states are linear combinations of the form

[b.4U]

where  the  coefficients  (n, Q,  and  y) form  the eigenvectors  of  the  matrix  W:

1    0    0
0     1      K



















1

FIGURE 6.6:    Lifting  of  the degeneracy  in Example 6.2 (Equation 6.39).

we  get a  =                                            I    K  we  get a  = 1/2. (I  normalized  
them  as I  went  along.) Thus  the  “good”  states are7



[6.41]




Problem 6.8  Suppose  we  perturb  the  infinite  cubical   well  (Equation  6.30)  by putting a 
delta function  “bump”  at  the point  («/4. o/2. 3‹i/4):




rs        er
degenerate)  first  excited  states.
e  eround  s at




7We might  have  guessed  this  1 esult  right  from  the  stari  by  notin¿u  that  the  oper‹ttor 
 P   -.  which interchanges  .r  and  y. commutes  with  If'. Its eip•envalues  are +  1  (for  
liinctions  that fire  ri'en  under  the interchange).  and  — I  (for functions  that  aide  
o‹1d).  In  this  case  /„    is alrc•‹iil;-  even. (/¿, -t- 9,.)  is  even, and  (/¿,  —  /,-)  is 
 odd.  This  is  not  quite  conclusive.  since  any  linens  combinatit›n   of  the  evcn  states 
would  still  be  even.  But  if  we  also  use  the  operator   Q_ ,  which  takes  c  to  ri  — 
c.   .ind  note  that  /„    is an  cigenI'unction  with  eigenvalue  — 1,  whereas  tire  other  
two  ‹me  eigelilunctions  with  eigenvalue  + 1. the  ambiguity  is resolved.  Here  the opcrators 
 P      .ind  Q   together  play  the  role  of  A  in  the  thetirem  of’ Section  6.2.1.


266          Chripter 6    Time-Independent Pertm hation Theos!


Problem 6.9  Consider   a  quantum   system   with  just  tlii ee   linearly   independent s ates   
S   ppose  t  e Hainil onian    n     a    x  fo

0    0


where  Vp  is a constant,  and  c  is  some  small  number  (c  44  1).
(a)   Write down the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of the tiiij›ertlfi bed Hamiltonian (c =  0).
(b)   Solve for the e.ract  eigenvalues of H. Expand each of them as a power series


approximate  eigenvalue  for  the  state  that  grows  out  of  the  nondegenerate eigenvector  of  
ff⁰. Compare  the exact  result,  from  (a).
(d)   Use  degenei ate  perturbation  theory  to  find  the  first-order  correction  to  the two  
initially  degenerate  eigenvalues.  Compare  the exact  results.

Problem 6.10  In  the  text  I  asserted  that  the  fiist-order  corrections  to  an  r-fold

the  “natural”  generalization of  the case ii  =  2.  Pi ove  it,  by  reproducing  the  steps in 
Section 6.2.1,  starting  with




Equation  6.22 can be interpreted  as  the eigenvalue  equation  for  the matrix  W.



In our  study  of  tne  nydrogen  atoin  t6ection  4.2)  we  tooK  tne  fiamiitonian  to  De

q              _  q/i-₂        e'-    1 2iii             4xeq r
(electron   kinetic  energy  plus  coulombic  potential  energy).  But  this  is  not  quite



Section 6.3:  The Tine Structure o[Hydrogen         267


Bohr energies of hydrogen.

Bohr energies:     of order     n*iiic* Fine .structure:     of order     a4nic* Lamb shift:     of 
order     a-’itic-
Hyperfine splitting:     of order     (rii/ixp)a4ixc*


enuc euys      st  rep ace         y
uce
rass     ro   e
eore  s gn   cant   s
the’  cm-r'nf)r•rJ   finr•  «fz•i¥r•fyyz•4•,   whtr'h   i 8  nr In nlly   rJHr•   Inn  twn      rJl 
6t1nr't   mr•r'h nn i mm 8-   n
relativistic  correction,  and  spin-orbit  coupling.  Compared  to  the  Bohr  energies (Equation  
4.70),  fine  structure  is  a  tiny  perturbation—smaller  by  a  factor  of  m², where

e‘                1
4R>0          1.37.036
[6.43]
is the famous fine structure constant. Smaller still (by another factor of n) is the s            o 
 i   e   wi          qu  n       ion o           ec r c   e       n   s       er   y

magnetic  interaction  between  the  dipole  moments  of  the electron  and  the proton. This 
hierarchy  is summarized  in Table 6.1. In the present section  we will  analyze the fine  
structure  of  hydrogen,  as an application  of  time-independent perturbation theo

em 6.11
(a)   Express  the Bohr’ energies  in terms  of  the fine  structure  constant  and  the iest


to the empirical  values of ro. e,  ñ.  and  c). Comment:  The  fine  structure  con- stant  is 
undoubtedly  the most fundamental  pure (dimensionless) number in all o   p  ys cs    t  re ates  t 
 e    asic  constants  o   e ec   o    acne is     (t   e  c  arge  o

constant).  If  you  can  solve  part  (b),  you  have  the  most  certain  Nobel  Prize in history 
 waiting for you. But I wouldn't  recommend  spending a lot of time on  it  right  now; many  smart 
 people  have tried, and  all  (so far) have failed.


6.3.1  The Relativistic Correction
The first temi in the Hamiltonian  is supposed  to represent  kinetic energy:

T  ——  —i in *
2

—  2ni

[6.44]

268          Chapter 6    Tinte-Independent Perturbation  Theory

and  the canonical  substitution  p —›  (h/ i) 9  yields the operator

[6.45]



formula  is

T  ——

i    (  / )

— ir c2.

[6.46]
The  first   term  is  the  total   relativistic  energy   (not  counting   lolential   energy, 
which  we  aren't  concerned  with  at  the  moment),  and  the  second  term  is  the  i est 
energy—the  diffet ence  is the energy  attributable  to motion.
We need  to express  T  in  terms of  the (relativistic) momentum,





instead  of  velocity.  Notice  that



SO

l  — (r/r)g =  (T  -b iii




[6.481

Thi.s  relativistic   equation  for  kinetic  energy   reduces  (of  course)  to  the  classical 
result  (Equation  6.44),  in  the  nonrelativistic  limit  p  «    iii c; expanding  in  powers of 
 the  small  number  (p/rim),  we  have

T

*              4
D‘            D     


The lowest-order    relativistic  correction  to the Hamiltonian  is evidently

[6.50]


The  kinetic  energy  of  the  electron  in  liydrop•en  is  on  llic  order  of  10  eV.  which  
is  minisculc compared  to  its  rest  energy  (31 1.000  eV),  so  the  hydrogen  atom  is  
basically  nonrelativist ic.  and  we can  afford  to  keep  only  the  lowest-order  correction.  
In  Equation  6.49.  p  is  the  rrfctivistic  momentum (Equation  6.47),  riot   the  classical   
momentum  iti u.   It   is  the  former   that   we  now   associate   with   the quantum  opelator 
 —ifl9.  in  Equation  6.50.

Sectfott 6.3:  The Fiite Structure o[H ydrogen         269
In  first-order  perturbation  theory,  the correction  to  E,›  is given  by  the expec- tation  
value of  H'  in the  unperturbed  state (Equation  6.9):
1     (r'9!p'd).           [6.51]

i'iow,  the Schrodinger  equation  (for  the  unperturbe‹i  states)  says
p'Q=2›n(f-V)/,
[6.52]

and  hence’
6,! =  —



2ii!C



((E  —

i
2ric’-


[6.53]
So far this is entirely  general;  but we  re interested  in  hydrogen, for  which  Y(r) =



   1  
2tnc’-
  e'         1             e‘      “    1      ,             [6.54]

where  €„  is the Bohr energy  of  the state in question.
To complete  the job,  we need  the expectation  values  of 1/r   and  1/r', in  the

1                                                 [6.55]
where  r  is the Bohr  radius  (Equation  4.72).  The  second  is not  so simple  to derive (see  
Problem  6.33),  but  the answer  is10


1                  1
r’-          (/ +   1/2)r3o*
E  -F 2E,!   4n.,)  1             c•‘                   1
[6.56]


"There  i    s‹ime    leiehi-‹›f-i . »‹i  :»  this      .ineii ver   which  cxpliiil x  ihe  
hermilicil y  ref  /i‘  ancl  ol’ (E   —  V).  In  truth,  the  operator   p    is  no/   hermitian 
  for  states  with  1        0  (see  Problem  6.15),  and the  applicability  of  perturbation  
theory  to  Equation  6.50  is  therefore  called  into  question  (for  the  case
1  ——  (I j. Fortunately,  the  v.vact  solution  is  available;  it  can  be obtained  by  using  
the  (relativistic) Dirac
equation   in  place  of’  the  (norHelativistic)  Sclii‘iidingcr  equation.  and  it  coiifirrns  
tlic  results  we  cibi‹iin
here  by  less  rigorous  means  (see Problem  6.19).
'0Tlic general  formula  for the expectation  valuc ol’ cut  power of r  is given  in Hans  A.  
Bethe and Edwin  E.  Salpeter,  Quoitliiiit  Meclioiiic-s  of  Oiie-  mid Ti vn-Elrctroit  Alonts,  
Plenum.  New  York  11977), p.  17.

270        Chapter 6    Time-Independent Pertiirhation Theory

or, eliminating  n  (using  Equation  4.72) and  expressinp•  everythinp•  in  terms  of  £„ (using 
 Equation  4.70):

(€„)-       4n     -3               [6.57]
2ric*    I -   I/2
Evidently   the  relativistic  correction   is  smaller  than  6„,   by  a  factor  of  about
Egg/m c'  = 2 x  l0*⁵.

calculation  (Equation  6.5 l),  in  spite  of  the fact  that  the  hydrogen  atom  is  highly 
degenerate.  But  the  perturbation  is  spherically  symmetrical,  so  it  commutes  with L'- and  
L,-. Moreover,  the eigenfunctions of  these operators (taken  together)  have distinct  
eigenvalues  for  the  x-  states  with  a  given  E„.  Luckily,  then,  the  wave functions   fq 
„,  are  the  “good”  states  for  this  problem  (or,  as  we  say,  ii,  /,  and in  are  the  
good  quantum  numbers),  so  as  it  happens  the  use  of  nondegenerate pemirbation  theory  was 
 legitimate  (see the “Moral”  to Section  6.2.1).

*Problem 6.12  Use the virial  theorem  (Problem  4.40)  to prove Equation  6.55.


state  43:i .  Check  your  answer  for  the  special  cases  s  =  0  (trivial),  s   =   — l 
(Equation  6 55), .i  =   —2  (Equation  6 56), and ,s  =   —3 (Equation  6.64). Comment on the 
case s  —— —7.
the one-dimensional harmonic oscillator. firm: Use the technique  in Example  2.5. s s sProblem 
6.15  Show  that  p'- is hermitian,  but  ;    is nor, for  hydrogen  states  with
/  =  0.  firm:  For such states      is independent  of 8 and  Q, so
’dr)
(Equation  4.13). Using  integration  by  parts, show  that



Check  that  the  boundary  term vanishes for  J..o0. which  goes like

Section 6.3:  The £ine Structure  o[II) drogen          271
near the origin. Now do the same for p4, and show that the boundary  terms do not
vanish. In fact:
8f*   (/   — ni)
r/*   (nin)  '°
6.3.2  Spin-Orbit Coupling

the oroton  is circling  around  ii  (Figure 6.71. This orbiting  positive  charge  sets  uo a  
magnetic  field  B,  in  the electron  frame,  which  exerts  a  torque  on  the spinning electron, 
tending  to align its magnetic  moment  (p) along  the direction o1 the field. The Hamiltonian  
(Equation  4.157) is


To begin  with,  we need  to figure out  the magnetic  field  of  the proton  (B) and  the dipole 
moment  of  the electron (p).

The magnetic field  of  the proton.  If  we  picture  the proton  (from  the elec- tron's 
perspective) as a continuous current  loop (Figure 6.7), its magnetic  field can be calculated  
from  the Biot-Savart  law:

B  ——

with  an effective  current  I  —— e/ T,  where  e  is  the charge of  the  proton  and  T  is the  
period  of  the  orbit.  On  the other  hand,  the orbital  angular  iTiomentum  of  the electron  
(in  the rest frame of  the iuicleus)  is  L —— i in r =  2nnir'/ T. Moreover,  B and L point  in 
the same direction  (up, in Fip•ure 6.7), so




use
B =

ro>0   o enminaie  >o in
B,  L
L.                                      [6.59)









FIGURE 6.7:    Hydrogen    atom,   from    the
electron's  perspective.


272          Chapter 6    Time-Independent Perturbation  Theory

The magnetic dipole moment of the electron.  The magnetic dipole moment of a spinning charge is 
related  to its (spin) angular  momentum;  the proportionality

Let's  derive  it   this  time.  using  classical  electrodynamics. Consider  first  a charge q 
smeared  out  around  a ring of  radius  r,  which  rotates  about  the axis  with  period gure     
         e    agnet c    po e    o   ent  o   t  e r ng  is   e   ie   as t  e cu   ent
(q/ T) times  the area  tar-):



times  the angular  velocity  (2s/ T):


The  gyromagnetic  ratio  for  this  configuration  is  evidently       S  ——  q/2ni.  Notice that  
it  is independent  of  r  (and  T). If  I had  some  more  complicated  object,  such

axis),  I  could  calculate  p  and  S  by  chopping  it  into  little  rings,  and  adding  up 
their contributions. As long as the mass and  the charge are distributed  in the same

be the same for each ring, and  hence also for  the object as a whole. Moreover,  the directions of 
 p  and S are the same (or opposite,  if  the charge is negative), so
'     (2  n ) S.
magnetic  moment  is tirice  the classical  value:












about its axis.

Section 6.3:  The line Structure  of H ydrogeit          273

The  “extra”  factor  of  2  was  explained  by  Dirac,  in  his  relativistic   theory  of  the
electron.  1
Putting all  this together,  we have



But  there  is a serious  fraud  in  this calculation:  I  did  the  analysis  in  the  rest  frame 
nf  the  electron    hut  that's  tint  riti  itirrtinl  .rd.rrem —it  rirrrl,rrntr s   as  the  
elecirnn orbits  around  the  nucleus.  You  can  get  away  with  this  if  you  make  an  
appropriate kinematic  correction,  known  as the Thomas  precession.¹-  In this context  it  
throws



This  is  the spin-orbit  interaction;  apart  from  two corrections  (the  modified  gyro- 
magnetic  ratio  for  the  electron  and  the Thomas  precession  factor—which,  coinci- dentally,  
exactly  cancel  one another) it  is just  what  you  would  expect  on the  basis of  a  naive  
classical  model.  Physically,  it  is  due  to  the  torque  exerted  on  the  iag- ietic  dioole  
moment  of  the  spinning  electron,  by  the  map•netic  field  of  the  proton, in  the 
electron's  instantaneous  rest  frame.
aow st  e  qu     tu          ec                 n      ie  presence   o    spin  ocr    t  coup   
ng    t  e

lar  momenta are not separately  conserved  (see Problem  6.16). However,  Who  does
commute  with  L-’, S-’  and  the torn/  angular  momentum



' ' We have akcady  noted  that  it can be dangerous  to picmre  the electron  as a spinning  
sphere (see Prt›blcni  4.25).  and  it  is  not  too  surprising  that  the  naive  classical  
model  gets  the  gyroinagnetic  ratio wrong.  The  dei›icitiim   from  the  classicist  
expectation  is  known  as  the  g-factor:  p  =   ,¿›(‹J/2@S.  Thus tlic  y-factor of  the 
electron.  in Dirac's  theory,  is exactly  2.  But  quantum electrodynamics reveals  tiny 
corrcctions  to this:  g,.  is actually  2+  (o/a) +  ...   =  2.002 .... The calculation  and 
rneasuremcnt  (which agree  to exquisite  precision) of the so-called anomalous  magnetic  moment 
o1’ the electron  were among the  grcatest  achievements  ol’ twenticth-century  physics.
'-One way of thinking  o)‘ it is that  the electrons is continually  stepping  from onc  inertial  
system  to

could  avoid  thc  wholc  problem.  of coui se,  by  staying  in  the  let  frame,  in  which  the  
nuclcus  is  at  rcst.

ply
a     as       e    c                  pr           s
y   u       g                 r       y      cx     s      y     rq
tin  the  electron.  Well,  the  facl  is  that  a  moving  nia$iir/ir  dipole  iicquires  an  
efrrfi ir  dipole  moment, and  in  thc  lab frantic  the  spin-orbit  coupling  is due  to  the  
interaction  oi’ the  elv‹-lt-i‹   ficld of  thc  nucleus with   the  elecn-ic   dipole  moment   
of’  the  electron.  Becausc   this  analysis  requires   more  sophisticatcd electrodynamics,  ii  
seems  best  to  ‹idopt  the  clcctl on's  perspective.   where  the  physical  mcchanism  is more  
tralispurcnt.
' "More   precisely,   Thomas   precession   subtracts    l   trom   the   ,p   factt›r.   See   
R.R.  Haar   ‹ind L.  J.  Curtis,  Anti.  J.  Ph;’s.   55.  1044 (1987).

274           Chapter 6    Ti»ie-l›idepe›ideiit Perttirhrilion T/›eory

and  hence  these  quantities  at e  conserved  (Equation  3.71).  To  put  it  another  way, the  
eigenstates  of  L,-  and  Sq-  are  not  “good”  states  to  use  in  perturbation  theory, but  
the eigenstates  vL L-,   S'-,  J-,   and  I,-  cii e. Now

I    =  (L + S)   (L + S)      L‘ +  S‘ + 2L-   S.

SO
[6.63]

and  therefore  the eigenvalues  of  L   S are




In  this  case,  of  course,  s  ——  1/2.  Meanwhile,  the  expectation  value  of  1/i     (see 
Problem  b.35(c))  is
[6.64]



e’         1      (fi   /2)[y (y  -1-  1) — /(/  +   1) — 3/4]
8r<o »"c"          /(/ +   i /2)(r +  1)»"a"
or, expi essing it a   in terms o

n [J(J +  I ) — /(/ +  1) — 3/4]
SO                                                         /(I -l- 1/2)(/ +  I )

lt   is   remarkable,   considering    the   totally   different   physical   mechanisms involved,  
that  the relativistic  correction  and the spin-orbit  coupling  are of the same order 
(E,-,/iiir').  Adding  them together,  we get  the complete fine-structure formula (see  Problem  
6.17):

/  4'l/2)                        [⁶.⁶⁶]

'   Once  agaili.  the  case  f  =    0  is  problematic.  since  we  arc  ostensibly  dividing  by 
 zclo.  On  the other  hand   the  numerator  is  ali‹›  zero   sincc  in  this  case   i  =   .i.  
so  Equation  6.65  is  in‹1ctcrinin•ite. On  physical  grounds  there  sliouldn’t   bc  any  
spin-orbit  coupling  wlicn   f  =    0.  One  way  to  resolve  the ambiguity   is  to  intrtiducc 
  the  so-called  l3arwin  term  (sec.  for  instance.  G.   K.   Wtitidgate,  Eleitieiitat;s' 
Ati›iiti‹   Striictiii-e.  2nd  ed..  Oxliil‘d  ( l*983).   p. 6.3).  Serendipitously,  cven  
though  both  thc  relativistic con'ectitin   (Equ‹ition  6.57)  and  the   spin-orbit   coupiing   
(Equation  6.65)  arc  questionable   in  the  c:isc 1  —— 0.  thcir .sinn  (Equation  6.66)  is 
correct  for all  1 (sce  Problcm  6.19).


Section 6.3:  The £ine Structure oJ Hydrogen         275

















n = 2










- i-   3/2
--    j=  1/2









T=0 (S)
/ = 1
(P)
/  —— 3
(F)

FIGURE 6.9:    Energy levels of hydrogen,  including  fine structure (not to scale).

Combining  this  with  the Bohr formula,  we obtain  the grand  result for  the energy
levels  of  hydrogen,  with  fine structure  included:
13.6 eV                                                                    6.67

Fine  structure  breaks  the  degeneracy  in  /  (that  is,  for  a  given  n,  the  different
owe                                                       he s
acy in y  (see Figure  6.9). The z-component  eigenvalues  for orbital and spin angular momentum  
(in    and  iii,)  are  no  longer  “good”  quantum  numbers—the  statioliary states are  linear 
combinations  of states  with different  values of these quantities;  the “good”  quantum  numbers  
are ii, l,  s,  ,|, and  trip.’⁵

' ⁵To write  |y ni /}  (foi  given  I  and  s j  as  a  linear  combination  o1’ \l ritl j\S iit.  
)  we  would  use  the appropriate  Clobsch  Gordon  coefficients  (Equation  4.183).

276          Chapter 6    Time-ltidepen,dent Perti.irhatioti Theory


Problem 6.16  Evaluate  the  following  commutators:  (a) [L  - S,   L],     (b) [L    S,  S],

(c) [L    S.  J],
-(d) [L
S.  L-], -(e) [L
S,  S'-),  (f) [L   S. 7-].  Hint:  L   and  S  satisfy
the  fundamental   commutation   relations  for  angular  momentum  (Equations  4.99 and 4.134),  
but  they  commute  with each  other.

+Problem  6.17  Derive the fine structure formula (Equation 6.66) from  the relativis- tic  
correction  (Equation  6.57)  and  the  spin-orbit  coupling  (Equation  b.65).  ffiiii: Note that 
./  =   /  ñ    1/2; treat  the plus sign and  the minus sign separately,  and you'll find  that  
you  get  the same  final answer  either  way.

a sProblem 6.18  The most prominent  feature of the hydrogen  spectrum  in the visible region is    
e re         mer  ine, coming   rom t  e transi  ion ii =                         irs determine  
the  wavelength  and  frequency  of  this line according  to the Bohr  theory. Fine structure  
splits  this line into several  closely  spaced  lines; the question  is: ffou nuw;,  and  ivlicit  
is  their  spuciiig?  Hint.’   First  determine  how  many  sublevels  the it  —— 2 level splits 
into,  and find  Of   for each of these,  in eV. Then do the same for
n  =  3.  Draw  an energy  level  diagram  showing  all  possible  transitions  from  ii  =  3
to ii =   2. The energy  released (in the form of a photon) is (£3 — E_) +  k E,  the first

one  transition  to  the  next.  Find  k  E  (in  eV)  for  each  transition.  Finally,  convert to 
photon  frequency,  and determine  the spacing  between  adjacent  spectral lines (in Hz)—not  the 
frequency  interval between each line and the wtipei turbed  line (which is, of course,  
unobservable),  but  the frequency  interval  between  each  line  and  the it e. t  one.  Your  
final  aliswer  should  take  the form:  “The red  Balmer  line splits  into (???)  lines.  In  
order  of  increasing  frequency,  they  come  from  the  transitions  (1) j  ——  (???)  to  /  —  
(???),  (2)  y  =   (???)  to  /  =    (???),  .... The  frequency  spacing between  line (1) and  
line (2) is (???) Hz, the spacing  between  line (2) and line (3) is (???) Hz,         "

Problem 6.19  The  e.vact   fine-structure  formula  for  hydrogen  (obtained  front  the Dirac  
equation  without  recourse  to perturbation  theory)  is'6
Egg j  —— mc‘        1  -l-                                                                         
                 1
it  — (;   -l- 1/2) +      (y  +   1/2)

Expand  to order n4 (noting  that n       I ), alid show  that  you recover Equation  b.67.

'"Bet he and  Salpcter (footnote  10).  piige  238.

Section 6.4:  The Zeenuui  E[[ect         277

6.4  THE ZEEMAN EFFECT
When an atom is placed in a uniform external  magnetic field Bexl, the energy levels are shifted. 
This phenomenon is luiown as the Zeeman effect. For a single electron,
e pertur  ation  is where
is  the magnetic  dipole  moment  associated  with electron  spin, and


y=—
2»‹L
[6.70]




H    ——
2iii (L —1— 2S)   B„t.                                   [6.71]
The  nature  of  the  Zeeinan  splitting  depends  critically  on  the  strength  of  the external  
field  in comparison  with  the  iiitet mil  field  (Equation  6.59) that  gives  rise to  
spin-orbit  coupling.  lf  Btu        B;p  ,  then  fine  structure  doiiiinates,  alid  H'p  can 
be  treated  as a .small  perturbation,  whereas  if  Bqp   55  Bi»i,  then  the Zeenian  effect 
dominates,  and  fine  structure  becomes  the  perturbation.  In  the  intennediate  zone, where  
the  two  fields  are  comparable,  we  need  the  full  machinery  of  degenerate perturbation  
theory,  and  it  is  necessary  to  diagonalize  the  relevant  portion  of  the Hamiltonian  “by  
hand.”  ln  the  followinp•  sections  we  shall  explore  each  of  these regimes  briefly,  for 
the case of  hydrogen.


characterize  quantitatively a “strong”  and  “weak”  Zeeinan  field.

6.4.1  Weak-Field  Zeeman Effect
lf   B            B,q ,  fine  structure  dominates  (Equation  6.67):  the  “good”  quantulTl 
numbers are n, I, y, and iiij (but not m; and iii„ , because—in  the presence of spin- orbit 
coupling—L  and S are not separately conserved).ˡ‘ In first-order perturbation

l7The gyrom.iqnetic   r‹iiio  l‘or  ‹›i’laital   motion  is ,just   the  classical  value  
(r//2nt)—it   is  only  for
syiit  that  there  is  an  “extra”  lâctoi  ct‘ 2.
18 ln  this  problem  we  have  a  perturbation  (Zceinan  splitting)  piled on  top of’ a  
perturbation  (fine structure).  The  “•_ood”  cjuantuni  nunibel s  are  those  appr‹ipriaic  to  
the  dominant   perturbation—in  this case  the  fine .stlvcture.  The  secondary  pcrtui b‹ition  
(Zceni‹in  splittirig)  lifts  the  rciniuning  degcncr‹icy  in J,-,  which  plays  here  the  role 
 of’ the  oper.ator   A  ’in  the  theorem  of  Section  6.2.1.  Technically.  7-  does
not  commute dwith        .  but  ii  ‹toes  in  the  time  avcrap•c  sense  of Equation  6.73.


278          Ch ipter 6    Ti›iie-ltidepeiidetit Pertiirhotion  T/›eor y










n t  e presence o  spin-or  it cou- pling, L and  S are  not separately  conserved;  they precess 
about the fixed total angular momentum, J.

theory. the Zeeman  correction  to the enerey  is


Now L -1- 2S =  J + S. Unfortunately, we do not immediately  know the expectation value  of  S.  
But  we  can  fip•ure  it  out,  as  follows:  The  total  angular  irioiuentuln

vector.  In  particular,  the  I time) at craze  value  of S  is just  its projection  alonp• I:

[6.73]





S   J =
l
—(/'
+   S‘»*—  L’)               [ |( | +  1) +   s(s +  1) — /(/ +    l)].           [6.74]

from  which  it follows  that

UI       [6.75]


We  may  as well choose  the c-axis  to lie along  B, i: then


where


is the so-called  Bohr magneton.  The tore/  energy  is the sum of  the fine-structure part  
(Equation  6.67)  and  the  Zeeman  contribution  (Equation  6.76).  For  example,



the  ground  state  (ii  =   1,  I  =   0,  J  =  1/2,  and  therefore  gJ  =  2)  splits  into  
two



with  the  plus sign  for rig  =  1/2,  and  minus  for  »ij  =  — 1/2. These  energies  are



em             onsi  er        eig                     es,                  in      e energy o  eac

to  show  how  the  eliergies  evolve  as  Bexi increases.  Label  each  line  clearly,  and 
indicate  its slope.


6.4.2  Strong-Field  Zeeman  Effect
I    Bext       Bin•t the  Zeeman  effect  dominates;"  with  Bpq   in  the  z  direction,  the 
“good” quantum  numbers  are now  ii, /, m  , and oi, (but  not  j  and rig  because—in the 
presence of  the external  torque—the  total  angular  momentum  is not conserved, whereas  L -  
and  S-  ure). The Zeeman  Hamiltonian  is




ksBext













FIGURE 6.11:     Weak-field   Zeeman   splitting   of  the  ground   state  of  hydrogen;  the
upper line (ri   =  1/2) has slope 1, the lower line (EU  =   —1/2)  has slope —1.


In  this retinae  the Zcciiian  ePcet  is alsri  known  as the Paschen-Back  effect,


280        Chapter 6    Time-Independent t'erturhntton  Theory

and  the “unperturbed”  energies  are

[6.79]


In first-order perturbation  theory  the fine-structure correction  to these levels is



The relativistic contribution  is the same as before (Equation  6.57); for the spin-orbit tenn 
(Equation  6.b1)  we need






all  this  together  (Problem  6.22),  we conclude  that
13.6 eV   ,      3           l(l -I-  l)  — irtui ,
ti-’               4ii         /(/ +   1/2)(/  +   1)



[6.82]


case  is  1 —see  Problem 6.24.)  The  tot il  enerp•y  is  the  siini  of  the  Zeeman  part 
(Equation  6.79) and  the fine structure contribution  (Equation  6.82).

Problem 6.22  Starting  with  Equation  6.80,  and  using Equations 6.57, 6.61, 6.64, an            
  erive    qua ion


+Problem 6.23  Consider  the  (eight)  n  ——  2  states,   2.1tti; its    .  Find  the  energy  of

three tenns: the Bohr energy, the fine-structure (proportional  to o   ), and the Zeeman 
contribution  (proportional  to u B Bp   ). If  you  ignore  fine  structure  altogether,  how



(|n iii,))  for  weak  rmd  strong  fields.  Determine   EZ      (from  Equation  6.72)  and  the
fine  structure  energies  (Equation  6.67),  and  write  down  the  general  result  for  the
/  =   0 Zeeman effect—regrirdlcxs of  the strength of the field. Show  that  the strong- field 
fonnula (Equation  6.82) reproduces  this  result,  provided  that  we interpret  the 
indeterirtinate  term  in  square  biackets  as  1.

Section 6.4:  The Zeemcin  E[[ect         281

6.4.3  Intermediate-Field Zeeman Effect
In  the  intermediate  regime  neither  H'g  nor  Hy,  dominates,  and  we must  treat  the two on 
an equal footing, as perturbations  to the Bohr Hamiltonian  (Equation  6.42):
N’ =  HQ +  Hf,.                                            [6.83]
I’11 confine  my  attention  here  to  the case ii  =  2, and  use  as  the  basis  for  degen- 
erate  perturbation  theory  the  states  characterized  by  /,  y,  and  nij.'0   Using  the 
Clebsch-Gordan  coefficients  fProblem  4.51  or  Table 4.8)  to  express  | J »ij)  as  a linear 
combination  of  |/ »i }|s in,), we have:


?-0


l


—$ )    =   |1 1)

3  —} =  | l  — 1)     —)   .

/5      |    $)    =      2/3|1 0)|    })        -1-         3|1  1)|         ),


}  =           3|1 — 1)     t)     -I-    2/  |1 0)         ).


In  this  basis  the  nonzero  matrix  elements  of  Nf,  are  all  on  the  diagonal, and given  
by Equation  6.66;  HT     has four off-diagonal  elements, and  the complete matrix  —W is (see 
Problem 6.25):
5    — $         0            0            0            0             0             0             0
0       5y + Q        0            0            0             0             0             0
0              0        y  — 2Q         0              0               0               0            
   0
0              0              0        y -1- 2§         0               0               0           
    0
0          0          0          0      y -  7$     -j=$         0           0
0              0              0              0                Q      5    —    Q         0          
     0

0            0            0            0             0              0                $     5y + 3$

-'You can  use I,  iii  .  ni.‹  states  il‘ you  pi'elér—this  makes  the  matrix  elements  *f  
ff2  easier,  but tiiosc  of’  N/,  more  ‹liffi”cult:  the  9'   matrix  will  be  nit›re  
complicated,   but  its  eigenvalues  (which  arc independent  tif  basis)  ‹me  the  siimc  
either’  wa)'.


282          Ch ipter 6    Tune-Independent  P'erturhntion  Theory


where

y  =  (a/8)‘13.6 eV    and    Q =  H B Beni
Th                                      ar
to find  the eigenvalues  of  the  two 2 x 2  blocks. The characteristic equation for the rst  o    
  ese is




X                                       4y* -1- (2/3)yQ -1- (Q'/4).                [b.84]
The eigenvalues  of  the second  block are the same,  but  with the sign of $  reversed.

In  the  zero-field  limit  (Q  =   0)  they  reduce  to  the  fine-structiire  va)ues;  for  weak 
fields  (Q         y)   they  reproduce   what  you  got  in  Problem  6.21;  for  strong   fields
e  r    o  er     e   esu   s  o       o   e                no e     e  conve  hence   o
distinct  energy  levels,  at  very  high  fieldx.  ax  predicted  in  Problem  6.23).

E









0 !












FIGURE 6.12:    Zeeman  splitting  of  the  n  =   2  states  of  hydrogen,  in  the  weak, 
intermediate, and strong held regimes.

Section 6.5:  H yperfine Splitting         283
TABLE 6.2:    Energy levels foi the ii  =  2 states of hydrogen, with fine structure and Zeeman 
splitting.




E: — 3;r + Q/2 +   4jr' + (2/3);rJ + §'/4
E  — 3y + Q/2 —   4jr' + (2/3);rJ + §‘/4
'7                 E   — 3y — Q/2 +   4y'   — (2/3)yQ + Q-/4




Problem 6.25  Work  out  the  matrix  elements  of  /-I}  and  H,!„ and  construct  the IV-matrix  
given  in the text, for n  =  2.

+Problem 6.26  Analyze the Zeeman effect for the x =  3 states of hydrogen, in  the weak, strong, 
and intermediate  field  regimes.  Construct  a table of energies  (analo- gous  to Table  6.2),  
plot  them as functions  of  the external  field  (as in Figure  6.12), and  check  that  the  
intermediate-field  results  reduce  properly  in  the  two Strutting cases.




The proton itself constitutes  a magnetic  dipole,  though  its dipole  moment  is much smaller 
than the electron's because of the mass in the denominator (Equation  6.60):

[6.85]

(The proton is a composite  structure,  made up of three quarks,  and its gyromagnetic ratio  is  
not  as  simple  as  the  electron's—hence  the  explicit  g-factor  (g   ),  whose measured  value 
 is 5.59, as opposed  to 2.00 for the electron.)  According  to classical electrodynamics, a dipole 
 jz  sets  up a magnetic  field-'

B =                                        3   y6"(r).                            [6.86J
-'  11’ you are unifimiliar  with  the delta  function  term  in Equation  6.86, you can derive it  
by  trending the  dipole  as  a  spinninp•  charged  spherical  shell.  in  the  limit  Us  the  
radius  goes  to  zeio  and  the  charp•e goes  to  infinity  Iwith  p   held  constant).  See  D. 
J.  Griffiths. .4in. 7.  Pli;x.. 5tl. 699 ( 1952).


284          Chapter 6    Titne-ltidependent Pertiirhntioti Theory

So the Hamiltonian  of the electron, in the magnetic  field due to the proton's  mag- netic dipole 
moment,  is (Equation  6.58)



According   to  perturbation   theory,  the  first-order  correction   to  the  energy
aequa  on               e expec oa ue o     e pe  ur  in     na      on an




[6.88j


In the ground state (or any other state for which / — 0) the wave function  is spher- ically  
symmetrical,  and  the  first  expectation  value  vanishes  (see  Problem  6.27).
ean     ie     ro      quaio           we   n      a                                       o

[6.89]
in  the ground  state. ’1“his  is called  spin-spin  coupling,  because it involves  the dot In  
the  presence  of  spin-spin  coupling,  the  individual  spin  angular  momenta
are no longer conserved:  the “good”  states  are eigenvectors  of  the torrid  spin,
S  S,-FSC.                    6.90]


we     ethi
°e

S     S,  —  2 (S‘ — S,   — S,).                                [6.91]
But  the  electron  and    roton  both  have  s  in  1/2   so  Sz       S.-.               ñ-. In  
the triplet state (spins “parallel”) the total spin is  l, and hence  S'- -   2/i-; in the singles 
state the total spin  is   , and  S-'  —— 0. Thus
4g„/:’             /4,           et):
c*        —3/4,    (singlet).
Spin-spin  coupling  breaks the spin degeneracy  of the ground  state, lifting  the triplet  
configuration  and  depressing  the singlet  (see  Figure 6.13). The energy  gap is evidently
4p



Triplet

Unperturbed









FIGURE 6.13:    Hyperfine splitting in the ground state of hydrogen.
The frequency  of  the photon  emitted  in  a transition  front  the  triplet  to the singlet state 
is


and  the  corresponding  wavelength  is c/r   =  21 cm,  which  falls  in  the  inicrowavc region. 
This famous 21-centimeter line 1s aiiiong• the most pervasive and ubiquitous



Problem 6.27  Let a  and  b be two constant  vectors.  Show  that
4x (a   b)
3


[6.95]


to demonstrate  that

3(S


for  states  with  I =  0. ffiiir:     =  sin B cos Q/ -l- sin 6 sin Qy  -}- cos Ok.

Problem  6.28  By  appropriate   modification   of  the  hydiogen   formula.  deterininc the  
hyperfine  splitting  in  the  ground  state  of  (a)  muonic  hydrogen  (in  which  a muon—salne  
charge  and g-factor  as the electron,  but  207 times  the  liiass—SUbsti- tutes  for  the  
electron),  (b)  positronium   (in  which  a  positron—saNle  mass  and p-factor   as  the  
electron,   but  opposite  charge—substitutes  for  the  piotOlJ),   and
(c) muonium  (in  which  an  anti-muon—same  mass  and  g-i'actor  as  a  rnuon.  but oppOslte  
charge—substitutes for the proton).  lint:  Don't  forget  to use  the  reduced mass (Problem  5.1) 
in calculating  the  “Bohr  radius”  of  these exotic  “atoms.”  Inci- dentally,  the  answer  you  
get  for  positronium  (4.82  x  10*    eV)  is  quite  far  front the experiiTlental  valrie (8.41 
 x 10      eV);  the large discrepancy  is dtie  to pair anni- hilation  (e“  -1- e     —›      -|- 
 y),  which  contribiitcs  an  extra  (1J4) AE,  and  Hoes  not occur (of  course)  in ordinary  
hydrogen,  muonic  hydrogen,  or  niuoniuni.

286          Chapter 6    Time-lndepetident Prrfiirhotioit T/›gor)i

FI IRTTJF.R  PR SRI   F.M4 FCIR  GHAPTFR  6

Problem  6.29  Estimate  the con'ection  to the ground state energy  of hydrogen  due to the finite 
size of  the  nucleus. Treat  the nroton  as a uniformly  charmed  snherical shell of  radius b, 
.so the potential  energy of an electron  inside the shell  is constanf.
—e“-/    u epl›  ;  tnis  isn  t  very  realistic,  nut  it  is  tne  simplest  moaei,  ana  it  
wifi

parameter  (li/«),  where  o  is  the  Bohr  radius,  and  keep only  the  leading  term,  so your 
final  answer  takes the form
AE
=   A(bin!“.

rour  nusiness  is  to  uetei mine  tfie  constant   n  anu  tne  power  x.  rinaiiy,  put  in
fa   m    1 fl— 15  rri   f nun   ohl   x/   the     rnrJ ii i c  ref  i he    nrr›trin4   on rJ  
wrnrlr  ru it  the   n r•tii ml  n i i i-rth»r
How does it compare  with  fine structure  and  hyperfine  structure?






a)   tne ground  state;
(b1  the   (tnply   degenerate)   first   excited   state.   I-Itnt.’    Use   the   answers   to


s    sProblem  6.31  Van der Waals interaction. Consider two atoms a distance B apart. Because  
they  are  electrlcally  neutral  you  imght  suppose  there  would  be  no  lorce

model  this system, picture each atom  as an electron  (mass ni, charge  —e) attached by a spring 
(spnng constant   Qty theqnuc  bus (charpeJ -1-e)    spin Figure 6 14q Wepll

unperturbed  sYstem  is
1             1               i           1
—k.v1‘
2      +    2iii          2






FIGURE 6.14:    Two nearby  polarizable  atoms (Problem  6.31).

ents                 er

The Coulomb  interaction  between  the atoms is




(a)  Explain  Equation  6.97.  Assuming  that  |.r  |  and  |.rd |  are  both  much less than
/t, show  that
[6.98]


into two harmonic oscillator  Hainiltonians:



2»'+
1                   r-
1                 e-


under  the change of variables

xz),    which entails

i
’*         2""
(c)  The ground  state energy  for this Hamiltonian  is evidently

E        li(u›   +  u›   ),    where mp  =                        0                     [6.101]

Without  the Coulomb interaction  it would  have been  Ep     ñu›p, where •0  =


.               [6.1021

Conclu.from:  There  is an  attractive  potential  between  the atoms,  proportional o     e   
nverse     x     powero       erseparalon              s     e    a      er      a   s interaction  
between  two  neutral  atoms.

The  unperturbed  states  are  of  the  form  J» (  1) €..,(.it),  where  J,  (.r)  is  a 
one-particle oscillator  wave function with mass to and spring constant k;  AV

in Equation  6.98 (notice  that the @ fir-order  correction  is zero).

s sProblem  6.32  Suppose  the  Hamiltonian  If,  for  a  particular  quantum  system,  is a   unc  
on  o    o   e  para   e er        e              an      n         e     e  e genva ue   an

2gg            cupter  6     Ti›iie-liidependent Perturhntion  Theory

eizenfunctions of  H(X).  The Feynman-Hellmann  theorem2‘  states  that

h E„
b H
=    1» I

Id»                                            [6.I03J

(assuming  either  that  Egg  is  nondegenerate, or—if  degenerate—that  the  gz„’s  are the  
“good”  linear combinations  of  the degenerate  eigenfunctions).
(a)   Prove  the  Feynman-Hellinann  theorem.   flirts:  Use  Equation  6.9.
(b)   Apply  it  to  the  one-dimensional  harmonic  oscillator,  (i)  using  X  =   in  (this 
yields a formula  for the expectation  value of V),  (ii) using  X =  /:  (this  yields (T   ),  
and  (iii)  using  X  =   iii  (this  yields  a  relation  between    T)  and  (V)). Compare  your  
answers  to  Problem  2.12,  and  the  virial  theorem  predictions (Problem 3.31).

s sProblem 6.33  The  Feynman-Hellmann  theorem  (Problem  6.32)  can  be  used  to determine  the  
expectation  values  of   l/r  and  1/r-  for  hydrogen.'"  The  effective Hamiltonian  for  the 
radial  wave  functions  is (Equation  4.53)
h     d          ñ    /(/ —I—  I)         e²    1

and  the eigenvalues  (expressed  in  terms  of I)"   are  (Equation  4.70)

E„

(a)   Use  X  =   e  in  the  Feynman-Hellmann  theorem  to  obtain  (1/r).  Check  your
SU
(b)   Use  X =   /  to obtain  (1/r²). Check  your  answer  with Equation  b.5b.

s s sProblem 6.34  Prove  Kramers'  relation:'"



--Feynrrlun    obtained   Eiquation  6.103    while   working    on   his   undergraduate    thcsis 
  at   MIT (R.  P. Feyninan.  Ph;-.s.  Rev.  56.  340.  19.39):  Hcllmanli’.s  work  was  published 
 foul   yeafs  Cftf)iCl’  lfl  ilFI ob,scure  Russian  journal.
o•                             .
-"C. S5nchcz del  Rio.  Aiit. J. Ph5-. .  50. 556  (1982):  H. S.  Valk.  Aitt. J. Pltys. 54, 921  
(1986).
In  p‹in  (b)  we   treat   I   as  a  continuous   v‹iriab1e:  n   becomcs  a  function   of’  /,  
according   to Equation  4.67,  because  y„„    .  which  must  be an  integer. is fixcd.  To avoid 
confusion.  l  have eliminated ii,  to rcveal  the dependence  on  I  explicitly.
-5This  is also  knowli  as  the (second)  Pasternack  relation.  See H.  Bckei ,  Anti.  J. Ph5s.  
65.  1118 ( 1997).  For a  proof  based on  the Foynman-Hultmann  theorem  (Problem  6..32).  sec  
S.  Balasubi-amanian, Aiit.  J.  Phys.  68.  959 (2(1001.

further  Prub/e›iis [or  Chapter  6         289

which  relates  the expectation  values  of  r  to  three  different  powers  (.s, .i  — 1,  and
.i  —  2),  for  an  electron  in  the  state  /„t„,  of  hydrogen.  Hi.tit:  Rewrite  the  radial 
equation  (Equation  4.53) in the form



and  use  it  to  express  /‘(iii 'ii”)dr  in  terms  of  (r"),  (r     ¹   ,  and  (r’*').  Then  
use
integration   by  parts  to  reduce  the  second  derivative.   Show  that  /(i‹i-‘"ii') dr  —
—(s/2)(i '*'  ),  and   J(ii'r'o’) di    ——   —[2/(s  +    l)) J(ii  r  +l ii’)  lr.   Take   it   
from there.

Problem 6.35
, an               in        iainers   re    ion     qua ion
to obtain  formulas  for (r    I  ), (r), (r-), and (r -  ). Note that  you could continue
indefinitely,  to find  any  positive  power.
(b)   In  the other  direction,  however,  you  hit  a  snag.  Put  in  s       —1,  and  .show 
that all  you  get  is a relation  between  (i *')    and  (r*').
(c)   But if  you  can get  (r*')  by some other  means,  you  can apply  the Kramers' relation to 
obtain the rest of the negative powers. Use Equation  6.56 (which is derived  in Problem  6.33)  to 
determine {r*³), and check your answer against Equation  6.64.

+Prob1em 6.36  When  an  alom  is  placed  in  a  uniform  external  electrlc  field  E„„ the  
ener_•y  levels  are  shifterl—a    henn xennn  knnwn  as  the Stark  effert  (it  in  the 
electrical  analog  to the Zeeman effect). In this problem  we analyze the Stark effect for  the  n 
 =  1  and ii  =  2 states of  hydrogen.  Let  the field  point  in  the  z  direction, so the  
potential  energy  of  the electron  is


Treat  this  as  a  perturbation  on  the  Bohr  Haiiiiltonian   (Equation  6.42).  (Still  is 
irrelevant  to this problem,  so ignore  it. and  neglect  the fine sometime.)
(a)   Show  that  the  ground  state  enerp•y  is  not  affected  by  this  perturbation,  in first 
 order.
(b)  The  first  excited  state  is 4-fold  degenerate:      9‹›. 421.1 • 1210.  4si — i .  Using 
degenerate  perturbation  theory,  determine  the  first-oi'der  corrections  to  the energy. Into 
how  many  levels  does  E   split?
(c)   What are the “good”  wave functions  for part  (b)‘? Find  the expectation  value of  the  
electrlc  dipole  moliient  (p,.  =   —ter)  in  each  of  these    good”  states.

2f0           Chapter 6    Time-lndependetit  Perttii holion Wheor y

Notice that the results are independent  of the arDlied  field—evidentlY hYdro- gen  in  its first  
excited  state can carry  a  pei'inntieiit  electric  dipole  momer.t.
Hiitl.’  There  are  a lot  of  integrals  in  this problem,  but  aliiiost  all of  theirs are 
zero. no siuciy eacii one careFuiiy,  Oetore  you  do any calculations:  ir tne Q integral
ve  n1 the    s     fhr  .rr.  s   nnf   ivlJr‘h   nn1nt     n   rJ nt  n  a    fhr•   r    snfl   
i0     ntr• orn1c I    in›-rim/  r  r  rat›o›  '
13'        31'        3Rn £cxi‘.all  other elements are zero.

e +rrooieni  o.o     nonsioer  tne  niarx  efiect  trroniein  o.Jo)  ior  me  n  —  o  states  or 
hydrogen.   Thcre   are   initially   nine  degenerate   states,   /3¿„,   (neplectinp   spin,   as 
before),  and  we  turn  on  an electric  field  in  the  c  dlrection.
(a)  Construct  the 9 x 9 matrix  representing  the  perturbing  Hamiltoliian.  Pni'tial ausi ther 
.  (300|z| 310)  =  —3   6t7,  (310|z |320)  =  —3 V3n,  (31 11  |z|32 I  l)  =

(b)   Find  the  eigenvalues,  and  their degeneracies.

Problem 6.38  Calculate  the  wavelength,  in  centimeters,  of  the  photon  emitted

is “heavy”  hvdroeen.  with  an extra  neutron  in  the nucleus: the  nroton  and  neutron bind  
together  to form  a deuteron,  with spin  l  and  magnetic  moment


the deuteron  r-factor is  1.71.

a    al•roblem 6.3f   In a crystal, the electric field of  neighboring ions perturbs the energy

by  three pairs of  point charges. as shown  in Figure 6.15. (Spin  is irrelevant  to this problem, 
 so ignore  it.)
(a)   Assuming  that  i  // d   ,  r       f/„  and  r       d j,  show  that


where
and  V0  =   2(#id-”-l-

(b)   Find  the  lowest-order  correction  to the  ground  state energy.
(c)  Calculate  the  tirst-order  corrections  to  the energy  of  the  first  excited  states (n  
=   2). Into  how  many  levels  does  this  four-fold  degenerate  system  spllt,

fefrarnnal  svinmefrv.  fli  =   R›  2.13  . fiii\  i)a  the -General  case of orthorhom-
bic symmetry  (all  three  different)‘?

Eurther T'roblems  [or C5opfer 6          291










’3


'‹2                                                       d2                         'z2







FIGURE 6.15:    Hydrogen  atom  surrounded  by six  point charges  (crude  model for  a crystal 
lattice); Problem 6.39.


•Problem  6.40  Sometimes  it  is  possible  to  solve  Equation  b.10  directly,  without having  
to expand  /,l    in  terms  of  the  unperturbed  wave  functions  (Equation  6.1 l). Here  are  
two particularly  nice  examples.
(a)   Stark  effect  in  the  ground  state  of hydrogen.
(i)   Find  the  first-order  correction   to  the  ground  state  of  hydrogen  in  the presence  
of  a  uniform  external  electric  field  £„,    (the  Stark  ellect—see Problem  6.36).  Hiiifr  
Try  a solution  of  the  form
(A -I- Br -l- Ct   ›e°'“'“ cvs 8,
your   problem   is   to   find   the   constants   d.    B,   and   C   that   solve

(ii)   Use   Equation  6.14   to   determine   the   second-order   correction   to   the ground  
state  energy  (the  first-order  correction  is  zero,  as  you  found  in Problem  6.36(a)).  
Aiisn!er:   -in  (3ff*C E cxt/2fi)
(al   ii  tne  proton  nad  an  elec’H ic  dipoie  moment  p,   tne  potential  energy  of  tire
eleotrnn   in  h x/r)rune.n   wou ld   hn  serf iirhe.rJ   in   Ihe    nrnniint
,          ep cos 8

(i)   Solve  Equation  6.10  for  the  first-order  correctioii   to  the  ground  state
wave  functiOlL


292           Chapter 6    Time-ltii:lepetident Pertm hntion  T/›eory

(ii)   Show  that  the totnl  electric  dipole  moment  of the  atom is (surprisingly)
‹-,ero,  to this order.
(iii)   Use  Equation  6.14   to   determine   the   second-order   correction   to   the
ground  state  energy   What  is  the $r.st-nrder  rorrertion*








CHAPTER  7

THE VARIATIONAL PRINCIPLE





Suppose  you  want  to calculate  the ground  state energy,  Ep„   for a system  described by   the 
  Hamiltonian    H,    but   you   are   unable   to   solve   the   (time-independent) Schrodinger 
 equation.  The  variational  principle  will  get  you  an upper  houncl  for Egg,  which  is  
sometimes  all  you  need,  and  often,  if  you're  clever  about  it,  very close  to  the  exact 
 value.  Here's  how  it  works:  Pick   at y  rim nlcflized  J'unction   f


[7.1]

That  is,  the expectation  value of  H,  in the (presumably  incorrect)  state      is certain to  
o›!eiestiitmte  the  ground  state  energy.  Of  course,  if       just  happens  to  be  one of  
the  e.x‹ ited  states,  then  ohi iotisl j’  (H)  exceeds  Egg;  the  point  is  that  the  same 
holds  for any       whatsoever.
Proof:  Since  the (unknown) eigenfunctions of  H  form  a complete  set,  we can express       as  
a linear  coinblnation  of  them:'

with   H


' II’ the Hamiltonian  udrnlts sc‹ittci’ing states. as well  as bound states. then  we'll need an  
integral ils  WCl)  US .I Sum.  but the argument  is unchaliged.

2f4             Chapter  7     The  Variatiotial  Pt iticiple

Since      is normalized,




(assuming  the eigenfunctions themselves  have  been  orthonormalized:  (J„, |/„  )  = 6„„,). 
Meanwhile,




But the ground  state energy  is, by definition,  the smallest  eigenvalue, so Eqz  < Egg,
and  hence



which  is  what  we were trying  to prove.


Example 7.1    Suppose   we  want   to  find  the  ground  state  energy   for  the  one-
dimensional  harmonic  oscillator:



Of course,  we already know  the r.vrirr  answer, in this case (Equation  2.61)} hps' (1/2)/:in;  
but this makes it a good  test of  the method. We might  pick as our “trial” wave  function  the 
Gaussian,

(.  )      Ae"'“”"'.                                            [7.2]








Now

where,  in  this case,

(T




 d'-  
‹!.›-•—

[7.4]



[7.5]

Section 7.1:  Theory          295

and



SO


l
—nt
2





[7.6]


bound, let's miiiimi‹,e  (H  :
h-      »«›*
2»       8/›*



[7.7]

In this case we hit  the ground  state energy  right on the nose—because  (obviously) I  “just  
happelied”  to  pick  a  trial  function  with  precisely  the  forin  of  the  acti,icil ground  
state (Equation  2.59).  But  the gaussian  is veiy  easy  to woik  with, so it's a


Example 7.2    Suppose  we're  looking  foi’  the  ground  state  energy  of  the  delta- function  
potential:



Again,  we already  know  the exact  answer (Equation  2.129):  E_z   ——  —rim   /2J‘.  As before,  
we'll use a gaussian trial function (Equation  7.2). We've already determined the normalization, 
and  calculated   T  :  all  we need  is





Evidently

(#) =


[7.8]

and  we indow  that  this exceeds  Egg  for  all  b. Mlniinizing  it,

2iii-a-

SO
(6)'  min


///O’*
       g  •                                                            [7
7  /i “

wfiicn  is indeed  solTlewnat  nigfier  tnan  cg„    since u  >  2.


I  said  you  can  use  rug'  (normalized)  trial  function       whatsoever,  and  this true in a 
sense.  However,  for  cli.sc‹›iitiuuOl1.i  functions  it  takes some fancy  footwc to assign  a 
sensible  meaning  to the second derivative  (which  you need,  in  order calculate  (T   ).  
Continuous  functions  with  kinks  in  them  are  l'air  galTle.  howevi as  iong  as  you  are 
carefui:  tne  next  example  sfiows  how  to fiandie  tfiein.'

Example 7.3    Find   an   upper   bound   on   the  p•round   state  energy   of   the  on 
dimensional  infinite  square  well  (Equation  2.19),  using  the  “lriangular”  trial  wa 
function  (Figure  7.1):"


[7.1
0.                    otherwise,
where  A  is detennined  by  nonnalization:

A |“                .  '  ‹/.1  -I-          (r/  — .z)- r/.i            A |-—
l 2
















FIGURE 7.1:    Triangular   trial   wave   function   for   the   infinite   square   well   (Equa 
tion 7.10).

'Fol  a collection of’ ilitercsillie cxamoles scc W.  N. Met. /itr.  J. Ethic. Sci. Terlt. 50. 513 
i 19991
*T‘licrc  is  no  point  in  trying  a  function  (such  as  the  gaussian)  that  “leaks”  outside 
 the  well
because  you‘11  Act  { 1*)       xc.   and  Equation  7.1  tells  you  not hing.

Section 7. I:  Tfgorj›        297
dg/dx
A
a/2
I               I
— A -
FIGURE 7.2:    Derivative  of  the wave function  in Figure 7.1.

In  thls case




d.v


A.          if  0 <  :r  <  o/2,
— A.       if o/2  <  .r  <  a, 0,          otherwise,

as indicated  ln Figure  7.2. Now, the derivative  of a step function is a delta function (see 
Problem  2.24(b)):

[7.12)


and  hence

!u› = — ?’A  
_       fi'A
" "    2»

N‹›) — 2a(' —•/2) +a(.'- —.'›it(» •i«
ñ - A'-a       l2/i'
2in         2irn*





[7.13]

The exact ground state energy is E$,     u -’h"/2m a   (Equation  2.27), so the theorem works  (12  
>  x‘).

The variational  principle  is extraordinarily powerful, and embarrassingly easy to  use.  What  a  
physical  chemist  does  to  find  the  ground  state  energy  of  some complicated  molecule  is 
write down  a  trial  wave function  with  a large  number  of adjustable  parameters,  calculate   
H  , and  tweak  the  parameters  to get  the lowest

often  get  miraculously  accurate  values  for  €  ,.  Naturally,  if  you  have  some  way of  
guessing  a  re ilisti‹:   f.   so  much  the  better.  The  only  ti‘ouble  with  the  method




298          Chapter 7     T/›e Vet iatioiial  Priiiriy›/e





+i ruoiem  / . i    tree  ‹t  p‹iussi.iii   tri‹ii   iuncvion   f ñqu‹itiun   /.âj  ve  uiit‹iin   
viic  iowcsi upper bound you can on the ground state energy of (a) the linear potential:  V(x) = a 
|.r |; (b)  the  quartic  potential:  V (.v)  =   aa ".

l•roblern 7.2  find  the best  bound on  +,   for the one-dimensional harmonic  oscil-
lator using  a trial  wave function  of  the form
A

where  A  is determined  by  norrnalixation and  I›  is an  adjustable  parameter.

Problem 7.3  Find  the  best  bound  on  E$,  for  the  delta-function  potential  V(a) =
—o6(.r),  using  a  triang•ular  trial  function  (Equatioli  7.10,  only  centered  at  the  ori-
gii). This  time  ri  is  an  adjustable  parameter.

Problem 7.4
(a)   Prove  the  fol1owinp•  corollary  to  the  variational  principle:  If  (/  |/s,}  = 0, then 
 (If)  >  E z, where  £t‹  is the energy  of  the first excited  state.
Thus, if we can find a trial function that is orthogonal to the exact g•round

difficult  to be sure  that      is orthogonal  to  /„,    since (presumably)  we don't know  the  
latter.  However,  if  the  potential   V(.r)  is  an  even  function  of  z, then the groulid  
state is likewise even, and  hence any odd  trial function  will

fh)   Finrl  the heat hniinrl  nn the lii st excirerl state nf  the ni e-rIimensinna1 harmonic
oscillator  using the  trial  function





In  practice   this  isn't   much  of‘  a  limitation.  and  there  ure  komeii mcs  ways  of  
estimating   the accuracy.  The  groulJd  .$filfC  hClitlRi  hils  been  calcUlatcd  to  lrany  
signi Ilcant  digits  in  this  way—see  for example G.   W.  Drake  ct  al., Ph  . .  Rei .  A 65. 
054501  (2002) or  Vladimir  1.  Korobov.  Ph; s. Re v.  A 66. 024501  (2002›.
"For a systcniatic  extcnsitin  of  the  variational  principle  to  the  calculation  of excited 
state  ener- gics  sec. for  ex‹ilnple.  Linus  Pauline  and E.  Bright  Wilson.  liitrodtictioti  
in Qtintuuiti  3frr/i‹iiiir.s,  Wit/i A ›;›licati‹ms  ir› C/ii•itii.s’ti  .  McGiaw-Hill.  New  
York 11 JJJ•    tIQcrback  edition  19851. Section  26.

Section 7.2:   The G routed  Stnte  o[Heliutn          29f


Problem  7.5
(a)   Use  the  variational  principle  to prove  that  first-order  non-degenerate pertur- hatinn  
thenry  always   rn›er-erri›nrirer  (nr at  any  rate  never  rrnrfere rri›urire r)  the. ground  
state energy.
(b)   In  view  of  (a),  you  would  expect  that  the  secotid -order  corvectioR  to  the ground 
 state  is  always  negative.  Confirm  that  this  is  indeed  the  case,  by




The  helium  atom  (Figure  7.3) consists  of  two  electrons  in orbit  around  a  nucleus 
containing  two  protons  (also  .some  neutrons,  which  are  irrelevant  to  our  purpose). The 
Hamiltonian for this system (ignoring  fine structure and smaller corrections)  is:


H = -
  e'-       2
+
2             1     

[7.14]

2»+
4s   0    r 1      r:        ir1  — ri
Our  problem  is  to  calculate  the  ground  state  energy,  Eg  . Physically,  this  repre- sents 
 the  amount  of  energy  it  would  take  to  strip  off  both  electrons.  (Given  Egg It  is 
easy  to  figure  out  the  “ionization  energy”  required  to  remove  a  single  elec- tron—see  
Problem  7 6.) The ground  state energy of  helium  has  been measured  to great  precision  in  
the laboratory:
=  —78.975  eV     ex  erimental                               7.15
This  is the number  we would  like  to reproduce  theoretically.
It  is  curious  that  such  a  simple  and  important  problem  has  no  known  exact solution.⁶ 
The  trouble comes from  the electron-electron repulsion,
4u<0 l•1 — r,|









+2e







FIGURE 7.3:   The helium atom.

There  do  exist  exactly  sciluble  three-body  problems  with  many  of  the  qualitative  
l‘eatures  of helium,  but  using  non-coulombic  potentials  (see  Problem  7.17).

300          Chapter 7    The Varintionnl  Prixri§/e

If  we ignore this term altogether,  H  splits into two independent  hydrop•en  Hami]- tonians 
(only  with  a  nuclear charge  of  2e, instead  of  e). the exact  solution  is  just the product  
of  hydrogeiuc  wave  functions:

f7.17]

and  the  energy   is  8E;    —   —109  eV  (Equation  5.31).’  Tlii.s  i.s  a  long  way  from
—79 eV,  but  it's  a start.
To  get  a  better  approximation  for  Ep,  we'll  apply  the  variational  principle, using       
as the trial wave functiolJ. This is a particularly convenient choice because It's an eigenfunction 
 of  o7O.ii  of  the Hamiltonian:




Thus

where’
[7.18]

[7.19]


[7.20]

I'll do the r   integral  first: for this purpose r   is fixed, and  we may as well orient the  r   
coordinate  system  so  that  the  polar axis  lles along  rl  (see Figure 7.4).  By the law  of 
cosines,




and  hence



e  "‘°"'
|r   — r
|rl  — r2|  —      l     +            2  ₁    co      .
[7.21]

The Q,  intep•ral  is  trivial  (2s);  the 82  integral  is

^                sin 8,
l     +     y     2       cos                                                         ()


7     re  ‹r  is  the  iii‘din‹vry  Bohr  i‹idius  and   E    —  -  13.6/ ii    eV  i.s  the  nth  
Bolt‘  energy:  recall th‹it  l'or  a  nucleus   with  aioiiiic  number  Z.    Egg   —+   Z-   ñ„   
  and  ‹i   —•   ‹i /Z   (Problem  4.16).  The  spin conhguration  assticiatcd  with  Equation  
7.17  will  bc  antisyinnietric (thc  singlct).

However.  1  i egard  this  as  a  iiiixusc  ol’ the  method,  since  Hoc  pel turbation  is  
coliiparable  in  size  to  the unperturbed   potential.  I  pi‘et’er,  thereftiro,   to  think  
ot’  it  as  :i  v:iriational   calculation.   in  which  we  are looking   our  ‹in  upper  bound  
on  Ei     .


e o









0g          r2









P1GURE 7.4:    Choice of coordinates  for the r2-integral  (Equation  7.20).
1


[7.23]

Thus

. 2


[7.24]


It follows  that  (V„)  is equal  to
8   )

2rl       •    '     e*   ''   rl sin 8l di-i i:18] I!    .

The angular integrals are easy  (4s), and  the ›-i  integral  becomes

) e      '   dr ==
5s- 128




and  therefore
5
—— E
2

34 eV,                         [7.25]
(if) =  — 109 eV +  34 eV =  —75 eV.                         [7.26]
Not bad  (remember,  the experimental  value is —79 eV). But we can  do better.

302          Ch ipter 7    The Vnrintionnl  Principle

We  need  to  think  up  a  more  realistic  trial  function  the    to   (which  treats  the two 
electrons as though they did not interact  at all). Rather than completely  ignoring the  influence 
 of  the  other  electron,  let  us  say  that,  on  the  average,  each  electron represents  a  
olniid  nr  negative  charge  whirh  partially  .shiolrls   thf  nucleus   en  that the  other  
electron  actually  sees  an  effective  nuclear  charge  (Z)  that  is  somewhat less  than 2.  1 
his  suggests  that  we  use  a  trial function  of  the  form



We'll treat Z  as a variational parameter, picking the value that minimizes H.  (Please note  that  
in  the  variational  method   we  never   touch  the  Hnmiltoninn  itself—the Hamiltonian  for 
helium  is,  and  remains,  Equation  7.14. But  it's fine to think  about approximating  the 
Hamiltonian  ri.i a  »•ay  of motivnting  the choice of the ti inl wnve function.

ing electron repulsion), only with  Z, instead  of 2, in the Coulomb  terms. With  this in mind,  
we rewrite  N  (Equation  7.14) as follows:

= -           e        —Z  + Z
2»        4vc0    rl       -z

e‘        (Z  — 2)+     (Z  — 2)              1
[7.28]

+    4u<0          ’1
The expectation  value of  U  is evidently
+     | rt   — rd
(H)       2Z*€t  + 2(Z — 2)                       ₊   ₍    ₑₑ₎   •                  [7.29]

Here  (l/r) is the expectation  value of  I/r   in  the (one-particle) hydrogenic  ground state  
4i00  (but  with  nuclear charge  Z): according  to Equation  6.55,

[7.30)

The  expectation  value  of  P,g  is  the  same  as  before  (Equation  7.25),  except  that 
instead  of  Z =  2 we now  want  or biirrry  Z—so  we multiply  n  by  2/Z:

5Z       e                5Z                                   [7.31]


Putting  all  this together,  we find

2Z'   — 4Z(Z — 2) — (5/4)Z   E I '     [   *Z2 +  (27/4)Z)  - I


[7.32]

Sections 7.2:  The Ground  State o[Heliutn         303
According  to the vaiiational  principle,  this quantity exceeds  Eg, for any  value of  Z. The low 
est  upper bound  occurs  when  (/f)  is minimized:

dZ
from  which  it  follows  that


Z= 27
16




=  1.69.                                         [7.33]


reducing  its effective charge from  2 down  to about  i.69. Putting  in  this value for Z, we find
E   =  —77.5  eV.                                  [7.34]

The  ground  state  of  helium  has  been  calculated  with  great  precision  in  this way,  using 
 increasingly  complicated   trial  wave  functions,  with  more  and  more adjustable  parameters. 
  But  we're  within  27c  of  the correct  answer,  and, frankly, at  this point  my own  interest 
 in  the problem  begins  to wane.'0

Problem  7.6  Using  €g,  =   —79.0 eV  for  the  ground  state  energy  of  helium,  cal- culate  
the  ionization   energy   (the  energy   required   to  remove  just  one   electron). Hint:  
First  calculate  the ground  state energy  of  the  helium  ion, He“,  with  a single electron  
orbiting  the  nucleus:  then  subti'act  the  two energies.

sProblem  7.7  Apply  the  techniques  of  this Section  to  the  H    and  Li+  ions  (each

Find  the effective (partially  shielded)  nuclear charge, and determine  the best  upper bound  on 
 £gq,  for  each  case.  Coitinietit:   In  the  case  of  H    you  should  find  that
(N)  >  —13.b eV,  which  would  appear  to  indicate  that  there  is no  bound  state  at

behind a neutral  hydrogen atom. This is not entirely surprising, since the electrons are less 
strongly  attracted  to the nucleus than  they  are in  helium, and  the electron repulsion  tends 
to break the atom apart. However,  it turns out to be incorrect. With a more sophisticated  trial  
wave  function  (see  Problem  7.18) it can  be shown  that
€g, <  —13.6 eV, and  hence that  a bound  state does  exist. It's only barel y  bound,

"The classic  studies  are E.   A.  Hylleraiis. Z. Phd s. 65. 209 ( 1930): C.   L.   Pckeris.  Ph; 
s. Rei›. 115.
1 216 (1959).  For  more  recent  work  sec  lootnotc  4.
''The  first  excited  state ol’ helium  can  be calculated  in  much  the same  way.  using a  
trial  wave l‘unction  orthogonal   to  the  grounil  state.  See  P.J.E. Peebles,  @‹nnniiii  
Mrcltanic.‹.  Princeton  U.P., Princeton.  NJ  (1992).  Section  40.

304          Ch ipter 7    The  V‹i1’ff2ffOIf‹i/ Pt'iiiciple

however. and  there are no excited  bound states,l '  so H* has  no discrete spectrum (all  
transitions  are  to and  front  the continuum).  As a result,  it  is difficult  to study in the 
laboratory,  although  it exists in great abundance on the surface of the sun.¹'



7.3  THE  HYDROGEN MOLECULE ION                                                                     
                       
Another classic  application  of  the  variational  principle  is tu the hydrogen  molecule ion,  
HP.   consisting   of   a  single  electron   in   the  Coulomb   field  of   two  protons (Figure  
7.5).  I  shall  assume  for  the  molnent  that  the  protons  are  fixed  in  posi- tion,  a 
specified  distance  ft  apart,  although  one of  the  most  interesting  byproducts of  the  
calculation  is  going  to  be  the  actual  vnlue  of  fi.  The  Hamiltonian  is

[7.15]

where  r   and  r2 are  the distances  to  the electron  from  the  respective  protons.  As 
always, our strategy  will  be to guess a reasonable  trial  wave  function,  and  invoke the 
variational  principle  to get  a bound  on  the ground  state energy.  (Actually,  our main 
interest  is in  finding  out  whether  this system  bonds at a// —that  is,  whether

trial  wave  function  indicates  that  there  is  a bound state,  a better  trial  function  can 
only  make  the  bonding  even  stronger.)
To construct  the trial  wave function,  imagine  that  the ion  is formed  by  taking a hydrogen  
atom  in  its ground  state (Equation  4.80),



bringing  the  second  proton  in  from  “infinity,”  and  nailing  it  down  a  distance  fi away. 
If  R is substantially greater than the Bohr radius, the electron's wave function probably  isn't  
changed  very  much. But  we would  like  to treat  the two protons on





+e                                                    +e     FIcuai 7.5:   The hydrogen molecule 
ion, H2.

' ' Robcrt  N, Hill,   I, Matlt. Plt ys. 18, 2316 ( 1977).
'-For further  discussion  see Hans  A. Betide and  Edwin  E. Salpeter, Quarter.ntt  Mecluini  s 
o.{Our -
‹tnd T••o-Electrnit  Atouts. Plenum.  New  York  (1977).  Section  34.



an equal  footing, so that the electron  has the same probability  of  beinp• wit   eit  er one.    
 is suggests t  at  we consi  er a tna    unction o


ualituin  chemists  call this  the  LCAO techni  ue  because  we are ex
iiioleci,il‹ii  wave function  as a linear combination  of atomic  orbitals.) Our  first  task is 
to rim iitalize  the trial  function:




1   0(':)|'  d  c -I- 2      /0(› i )   g(r2) d“r


Let
[7.39]

Picking  coordinates  so  that  proton  1  is at  the origin  and  proton  2  is on  the  c  axis
at  the Doint  B (Flgtlre  7.6),  we have

r   =  r    and    r,          * -F   *     2     cos   .                     [7.40]

and  therefore

























one
:       oor   n   es
c   c       on o        qu    on

306         Chapter  7    The Variation il Principle

The $  intep•ra1 is trivial  (2s). To do the B  intep•ra1,  let


Then





The r  integral  is now straightforward.



0



Evaluating  the integrals,  we find  (alter some algebraic  simplification),

[7.42]

is called  an  overlap  integral;  it  measures  the  amount  by  which  Y0(' i )  overlaps 10(›:) 
(notice  that  it  goes  to  1  as  fi —+  0, and  to 0 as  fi —+  on). In terms of i,   the 
normalization  factor (Equation  7.38)  in

2(1 +  /)
Next  we  must  calculate  the expectation  value of  H  in  the trial  state  J.   Not- ing that


J0(›’l)      E\ J0(   i )




same  with  r,  in  place of › l —we have
1-              e'-       1       1

e'-



[      0(* i)    +       0(*“2)a

4R>0      ' /“¿
0(*'I)    +
'     10(     2)

Section 7.3:  Tf e Hydrogen Molecule ton        307


It follows  that
(If)     Hi —2|A |‘       e'-   
4xc#

l
(  i)  —


o1)+( oO)

I'll let  you  calculate  the two remaining quantities, the so-called  direct integral,

f7.45]

and  the exchan  e inte  ral

[7.46]



[7.47]


and



—(e  /4nc9)(1/2n),  we conclude:

(H) ——   1 + 2'

[7.48]




[7.49]


course,  this  is only  the electi oii ’s  energy—there  is also potential  energy  associated with 
 the  proton-proton  repulsion:



Thus  the total  energy  of  the system,  in units  ot — E   , and expressed  as a function of .   
=  fi/a.  is less  than


2    ( I  —  (2/3)a-)e"-'"  -|- (I -|- x)e"'"
1 +  (1 +  x +  (1/3).-2)e

[7.51]

This  function  is  plotted  in  Figure  7.7.  Evidently  bonding  doe.s  occur,  for  there exists 
a region in which rhe graph goes below  — 1, indicating that the energy is less than  that of a 
neutral atom plus a free proton (— 13.6 eV). It's a covalent  bond, with the electron  shared  
equally  by  the two protons.  The equilibrium  separation  of  the protons  is about  2.4 Bohr  
radli,  or  1.3 & (the  experimental  value  is 1.06 h).  The

308          Ch ipter  7    The Variotional  Principle






—0.S










FIGURE 7.7:    Plot of  the function F(x), Equation  7.51, showing  existence  of  a bound
state (x is the distance between  the protons,  in units  of  the Bohr radius).

calculated  binding energy is 1.8 eV, whereas the experimental  value is 2.8 eV (the variational  
principle, as always, overestimates the ground state energy—and  hence i,ioderestimates the 
strength of the bond—but  never mind: The essential point was

the potential  well even deeper.


+Problem  7.8  Evaluate  D  and  X  (Equations  7 45  and  7.46).  Check  your  answers against  
Equations  7.47 and  7.48.


s sProblem 7.9  Suppose   we   used   a   minus   sign   in   our   trial   wave   function 
(Equation  7.37):


Without  doing any  new integrals,  find  F(.v) (the analog  to Equation  7.51)  for this case, and 
construct  the g•raph. Show  that there is no evidence of  bonding.'³ (Since the variational  
principle only gives an upper bound, this doesn't prone that bonding cannot  occur  for such a 
state,  but  it  certainly  doesn't  look  promising).  Comtneiit:
Actually,  any function  of  the form

(7.53)

Bonding  occurs  when  the electron  “prefers"  to  be  between  the protons.  attracting  ihem  
inward. But  the  odd  linear  combination  (Equation  7.52)  has  z  node  •it  the center.  so  
it's  not  surprisinq  that  this configuration  drives  the  protons  ap:trt.



further  Problems  for  Cl› ipter  7          309


either  proton.  However,  since  the  Hamiltonian  (Equation  7.35)  is invariant  under the 
interchange  P: rI      i2, its eip•enfunctions can  be chosen  to be simultaneously
s O
and  the minus  sign  (Equation  7.fi2) with  the eigenvalue  —1    nothing  ix to he gained by  
considering   the  ostensibly   more  general  case  (Equation  7.53),  though  you're welcome  to  
try  it,  it  you're  interested.

•  sProblem 7.10  The  second  derivative  of  F(x),  at  the  equilibrium  point,  can  be used  
to estimate  the  natural  frequency  of  vibration  (in)  of  the  two  protons  in  the hydrogen  
molecule  ion (see Section  2.3). If  the ground  state enerp•y  (lieu/2) of  this oscillator 
exceeds  the  binding  energy  of  the system, it will fly  apart. Show  that in

how  many  bound  vibrational  levels  there  are.  Note:  You're  not  going  to  be  able to  
obtain  the  position  of  the  minimum—still  less  the  second  derivative  at  that



FURTHER PROBLEMS FOR CHAPTER 7                                                                      
        
em
(a)   Use  a  trial  wave  function  of  the fomi
A cos(:ir.x/n).     if  (—o/2  <  z   <  o/2),
otherwise

to obtain a bound on the ground state energy of the one-dimensional harmonic oscillator.  What  is  
the  “best”  value  of  a?  Compare  (H)minWlth  the  exact

at     o/2; do you  need  to take account  of  this, as 1 did in Example 7.3?
Use           =  B sin             on  the interval               to obtain  a  bound  on  the 
first excited state. Compare  the exact  answer.

s sProblem 7.12
(a)   Generalize  Problem  7.2,  using  the  trial  wave  function"

310        Chapte,r  7   The vnriutiono/  Principle

for arbitrarr  ii.  Pnrtial nnsn!er:  The best  value of  b is given  by

,  _    /:     ii(4ii — 1)(4o  — 3)   "‘
itie›            2(217  -}-    )


using a trial  function  of  the form



Partial ansi»er.  The best  value of  b is given  by

,        /:     o(4n  — 5)(4ii  — 3)   ''‘
:n‹u           2(2ii  1   I )
(c)   Notice  that  the  bounds  approach  the  exact  energies  as  ii   —+   on.  Why  is that?  
ffixr.  Plot  the  trial  wave  functions  for ii      2,  ii  =   3,  and  ii  =  4,  and compare  
them with the true wave functions (Equations  2.59 and 2.62). To do it analytically. start  with  
the identity




Problem 7.13  Find  the lowest  bound on the ground state of  hydrogen  you can get usinp• a  
p•aussian  trial  wave function


where  A is detemuned  by  normalization  and  b is an adjustable parameter. Air.iireir
—11.5 eV.


s sProblem  7.14  If the photon  had a nonzero mass („iii would  be replaced  by  the Yukawa 
potential,
/   0), the Coulomb  potential


4R<0
where     =  in gr//:. With  a trial  wave function  of  your own  devising,  estimate  the binding 
 energy  of  a  “hydrogen”  atom  with  this  potential.  Assume  yo  55.1, and give your answer 
corrcct  to order  (pa)-.

Problem 7.15  Suppose  you're  given  a  quantum  system  whose  Hamiltonian   //o admits just  two 
eip•enstates,  J„   (with  energy  E„), and  /#   (with energ•y  Egg). They




are orthogonal,  noimalized, and nondegenerate (assume  E„  is the smaller of the two
energies).  Now  we  trim on a  perturbation  H',   with  the  tollowing  matrix  elements:


where /f  is soine specified  constant.
(a)   Find  the  exact  eigenvalues  of  the  perturbed  Hamiltonian.

theory.
(c)   Estimate the p•round state enerp•y of the perturbed system usinp• the variational principle,  
with  a trial  function  of  the  form

sin                                                 7.56
this  way  is  just a  neat  way  to  p•uarantee  that      is  normalized.
s                                          e
so accurate,  in  this  case?
ro   e    7       As al   e  p icit  exai  ple of   he  net  o   de  e ope   in  P o   e  i 7.1 
consider  an  electron  at  iest  in  a  uniform  magnetic  field  B  =   B-   ,  for  which  the 
Hamiltonian  is (Equation  4.158):
H,     eB,-    .                                       [7.57]
The eigenspinois,  2„ and  ¿  ,.  and  the corresponding  energies,  E,   and  E „  are given in 
Equation  4.161.  Now  we  trii n on  a  perturbation,  in  the  fomi  of  a  rinifonii  field



{a)   Find  the iiiatrix elements  of’ if', and  confirm  that  they  have  the structure  of

(b)   Using  your  iesult  in  Problem  7.15(b),  find  the  new  ground  state enei gy,  iii

(c)   Using your result  in Problem  7.15(c),  find  the vai iational  pilnciple bound  on the 
p•round  state energ•y.

s  s  +Problem  7.17  A1thoupq•h   the  Schi’i›dllip•er  eqiiatioll   for  helium  itself’  cannot  
 be so   e    exact  y   t  ere  ex st     e iu         e   sy  tein      a     o     i      e    c 
   o u  o  s

312         Chapter  7    T/›e Voriational  Principle

A  simple  examp1e'⁵  is    rubber-band  helium.”  in  which  the  Coulomb  forces  are replaced  
by  Hooke's  law  forces:


1
=  — 2»  (                                                     4

[7.59]

(a)   Show  that  the change  of  variables  from  •l    •2, to

(7.60j

turns the Hamiltonian  into two independent  three-dimensional harmonic oscil- lators:

r             —   — »- a! +
L   ‘”'
l                                                  1
—(1  — X)inm‘u             [7.61)
(b)   What  is  the e.vact  ground  state  energy  for  this  system?
(c)  If  we  didn't  know  the  exact  solution,  we  might  be  inclined  to  apply  the method of 
Section  7.2 to the Hamiltonian  in its original form (Equation  7.59).

the exact  answer?  Arise ct .  (H)     3ñ u›(1  — X/4).

s s sProblem  7.18  In Problem  7.7  we found  that  the  trial  wave functlon  with shield- ing  
(Equation  7.27).  which  worked  well  for  helium,  is  inadequate  to confirm  the existence  uf 
 a  bound  state for the  negative  hydrogen  ion.  Chandrasekhar'' used  a trial  wave function  
of  the fomi




where


Z 1                                                                       Zi
[7.62]


In effect, he allowed  two cliff‘ereiil  shielding  factor.s, suggesting that one electron is 
relatively  close to the nucleus,  and  the other is farther out.  (Because electrons  are 
identical  particles,  the spatial  wave function  inu.st  be syininetrized  with  respect  to 
interchange.  The  shirt  state—which  is  in‘e1evant  to  the calculation—is evidently

'   FO   i1  l3JOl’C  sO   âlsliC0tCd  iiiodel.  sec  R.  Crandall.  R.  Whitncll.  tiled R.   
Bcttec‹i,  Am.  J.  Ph;’s.  s2,
438 (198   ).

Eiitther Prof/eras for Cl›aptet  7        313
antisymineti'ic.) Show  that by astute choice of the adjustable parameters  Zt  and  Z you  can  
get  (H)  less  than  —13.b eV.   Answer.

(ff)             £1
y6+     y6
—.x   +   2.r7 +  1g6
2

where  z      Z|  -F Z2 and  v      2   Z      . Chandrasekhar  used  Zi  =  1.039  (since this  is 
 larger  than  1,  the  motivatinp•  interpretatlon  as  an  effective  nuclear  charge cannot  be 
sustained,  but  never  mind—it's  still  an acceptable  trial  wave  function)


Problem 7.19  The  fundamental  problem  in  harnessing  nuclear  fusion  is  getting the two 
particles (say,  two deuterons) close enough  together for the attractive  (but short-range)  
nuclear  force  to  overcome  the  Coulomb  repulsion.  The  “bulldozer”

collisions  to  brinp•  them  together.  A  more  exotic  proposal  is  muon  catalysis,  in which  
we  construct  a  “hydrogen  molecule  ion,”  only  with  deuterons  in  place  of protons,  and  a 
 i»ooiT  in  place  of  the  electron.  Predict  the  equilibrium  separation distance  between  
the  deuterons   in  such  a  structure,   and  explain  why  muons  are
superior  to electrons  for  this  purpose.17

+Problem  7.20  Quantum  dots.  Consider  a  particle  constrained  to  move  in  two dimensions  
in  the  cross-shaped  region  shown  in  Figure  7.8.  The  “arms”  of  the

the  shaded  areas  outside.  Surprisingly,  this  configuration  admits  a  positive-energy bound  
state.l
(a)   Show  that  the lowest  energy  that  can  propagate  off  to  infinity  is



any solution with energy less than that has to be a borind state. Hint: Go way out one arm  (say, 
.i  +> e), and solve  the Schrodinger  equation  by separation of variables. if  the  wave function 
 propagates out  to infinity,  the dependence on  x  must  take the  for:n exp(ik z x) with kg  > 
0.

7The classic  paper on  muon-catalyxed fusion  is J.  D.  Jackson.  Plt5•s.  her. 106, 330 (1957):  
for a more recent  popular review. see J.  Rafelski  and S.  Jones,  Scieiitifi‹- Aiitei-i‹‹iit, 
November  1987,  page  54.
'This  model  is  taken 1'rorn  R. L. Schult  ct ‹i/..  Pli;-s.  Re v. B  39,  5476  ( 1989).  In  
the  presence of  quantum  tunncling  a  classically  btiund  state  becomes  unbound;  this  is  
the  reverse:  A  classically unbound  state is qu‹intum  eicchanically  hoi,iit‹l.

314        Chapter 7   The Variational Princip Ie

















FIGURE 7.8:     The cross-shaped  region  for Problem 7.20.

(b)  Now use the variational principle to show that the ground state has energy less than  
£thr*hola. Use  the following  trial  wave  function  (suggested  by Krishna Rajagopal):

(1 — |zv   |/a²)e*°,        |.T |  < fi   and    y   < a

and elsewhere.
Normalize   it  to  determine   A,  and  calculate   the  expectation   value  of  H. Ansn!er:

3/l*      a-   -I- 2o +  3
one'         6 +   t1o
Now  minimize   with  respect   to  a,    and  show   that   the  result   is  less  than
£ihreshol‹.  Hint:   Take  full  advantage  of  the  symmetry  of  the  problem—you only  need  to  
integrate  over  1/8  of  the  open  region,  since  the  other  7  inte- grals  will  be  the 
same.  Note  however  that  whereas  the  trial  wave  function  is
continuous,  its derivati›!es   are  nor —there  are  “roof-lines”  at  x       0,  y  =   0, x  =  
      a,  and  y  =        e,   where  you  will  need  to  exploit  the  technique  of Example  
7.3.












CHAPTER  8

THF. WRB  APPRfJYIUATIfJN




The  WKB  (Wentzel,  Kramers,  Brillouin)ˡ  method  is  a  technique  for  obtaining

sion (the same basic idea can  be applied  to many other differential  equations,  and to  the  
radial  part  of  the Schrodinger  equation  in  three  dimensions).  It  is  particu-

barriers.
The essential idea is as follows: Imagine a particle of energy  €  moving through a  region  where  
the  potential  U(x)  is construe. If  E  >  U,  the  wave function  is of the  form

Wl

The plus sign indicates that the particle is traveling  to the right, and the minus sign means it 
is going to the left (the general solution, of course, is a linear combination

unchanging amplitude   A). Now suppose that  th)    is  iior constant, but varies rather slowly in 
comparison  to X, so that over a region containing  many full wavelengths e poen  a   s esse        
   cons an       en    is reasona   e  osuppose    a      re   ans yrncticnll j! sinusoidal, except 
that the wavelength and the amplitude change slowly with .r. This is the inspiration  behind the 
WKB approximation. In effect, it identifies two  different  levels  of  .i-dependence:  rapid  
oscillations,  modulated   by  gradual
variation  in amplitude  and  wavelength.

' In  Holland  it's KWB.  in  France it's BWK. and  in England  it's JWKB  (for Jeffreys).

ion
C    hte                        B  App  o  i

By the same token,  if  £   <  V  (and  V  is constant),  then      is exponential:


And  if  V(x)  is not  constant,  but  varies  slowly  in  comparison  with  1/c,  the  solu-

functions  of  x.
Now, there is one place where this whole program  is bound  to fail, and that is

1/ff) goes to infinity, and V(.   ) can hardly  be said to vary “slowly”  in comparison. As we 
shall see, a proper handling of the turning points is the most difficult  aspect

implement.

8.1  THE “CLASSICAL” REGION
The  Schrddinp•er  equation,



can  be rewritten  in  the following  way:

[8.1]

where


is  the  classical  formula  for  the  momentum  of  a  particle  with  total  energy  £   and 
potential  energy  P(x).  For the  moment,  I'll  assume  that  6   >   V(.i),  so  that  p(.r) s   
e       weca         s     e    cassica     regon     oi  o     ous     asons     casic     y     e 
particle   is  r‹›tihiirrl   tn  this  range  nf   r   (see  Fi oire  8  I )   In   oeneral    i/r  
 is  snnae complex  function;  we can express  it  in terms of its aitiplityde,  A(x). and its  
yliase,
(x          ot    o        ic       e          .


'I(r) = A(x)e’*!'‘'.
Using  a prime  to  denote  the  deñvative  with  respect  to  x,   we  find:
18.3]




and


d'-
dx

A” -|- 2i A’s’  -I- i AQ”  —  A(g’)²]e’'*.



[8.4J







Turning points








Classical region


plc
:         ss c    y  t  e
e  s co      e    o t  e   e   on      e  e

Putting  this  into  Equation  8.1:
2
” -1- 2i A $   +  i AQ   —  A(f›  )‘      —— A.                         [8.5]



inta  inai

—— A,                                                                  [8.6]

an


Equations  8.6  and  8.7  are  entirely  equivalent   to  the  original  Schriidinger equation. The 
second  one is easily  solved:

8.8

where  C  is  a  (real)  constant.  The  first  one  (Equation  8.6)  cannot  be  solved  in 
general—so here comes the approximation: We assume that the  infplitiide  A i ririe.s

is  much  less than  both  (Q')'  and  p-/li -.) In  that  case  we can  drop  the left side of
Equation  8.b, and  we are left  with


318          Chapter  8    The !VKB  Approxiniatioti


and  therefore



into C, which  may thereby  become complex.)  It follows  that





tenns, one wlth each sign.
Notice that

[8.9]










[8.11]

which  says  that  the  probability  of  finding  the  particle  at  point .i  is inversely  pro- 
portional  to its (classical)  momentum  (and hence its velocity) at that  point. This is exact y w 
 at you    o i    e  pect       e p   t c e   oesn  t spen    ong  n t  e p aces w  ere it is 
moving  rapidly, so the probability of getting caught there is small. In fact, the WKB  
approximation  is  sometimes  rlei irked  by  startinp•  with  this  “semi-classical” observation,  
instead  of  by dropping  the  A”  term  in  the differential  equation.  The latter approach  is  
cleaner  mathematically,  but  the  former  offers  a  more  plausible
sical  rationale.




nlte square  well  with a bumpy  bottom  (Figure 8.2):



otherwise.



[8.12]














FIGURE 8.2:    Infinite square well with a bumpy bottom.

Section  8.I:   The “Classical” Region         319
Inside the well  (assuming  E  >  V(.r)  throughout)  we have
    1            e'”'"   +  Co e°'   '“"'    .
or, more  conveniently,
[8.13]
where (exploiting  the freedom  noted ear lier to impose  a convenient  lower limit on the 
integral)
[8.14)


ow            must  go to zero at .r  —    ,  an       ere  ore   since
(.x)  goes  to  zero  at  .r       o,  so

Q (n)  =  n:ii:     (ii  =  1, ?, 3..    . ).


SO,



[8.15]







This  quantization  condition  detennines  the (approximate)  allowed  energies.
For instance,  if the  well  has  a,§ai  bottom  (V(.v)  =  0),  then  /J(.x)  =                 (a 
constant),  and  Equation  8.16 says  pm  =   iiu /i,  or



which   is   the   old   formula   for   the   energy   levels   of   the   infinite   square   
well (Equation  2.27).  In  this case  the  WKB  approximation  yields  the e. nct  answer (the 
amplitude  of  the  true  wave  function  is  coiistnnt,  so dropping   A“  cost  us nothing).



aProblem 8.1  Use  the  WKB  approximation   tu  find  the  allowed  energies  (E„)  of an  
infinite  square  well  with  a  “shelf.”  of  hcight   V9  extending  half-way  across (Figure  
6.3):

0,      if a/2   < .r  < a. otherwise.

320         Chapter  8    The WKB  Approximattoti

Express  your  answer  in  terms  of   to  and  60             (nxfi)2/2ma2  (the  nth  allowed 
energy  for  the  infinite  square  well  wlth  no  shelf).  Assume  that  E0      >   <0.  but  do 
not  assume  that  E„   4>  <0   Compare  your result  with  what  we  got  in Example  6.1
very  small  (the  perturbation  theory  regime) or  n  is  very  large  (the  WKB—semi- 
classical—regime).

+Problem  8.2  An    illuminating     alternative    derivation    of    the    WKB    formula 
particle  wave  function,      =   A exp( I   ipi’/f:),  we  write
(.  ) =   e'   (* '",

where   f(.v)  is  some  complex‘   function.  (Note  that  there  is  no  loss  of  generality 
here—any  nonzero  function  can  be written  in  this  way.)
(a)  Put  this into Schriidinp•er’s equation (in  the form  of Equation  8.1), and show that

•’!•i’“  — (/' ' + r'  = 0.
(I›)   Write  /(x)  as a power  series  in  it:




(J0  '                 iJ0’ =  2f0  /’l,      i‘ft“      2f0/} +  (/y)2.     etc.
(c)   Solve for  in(.  ) and  f  (.v).  and  show  that—to  first  order in  /t—you  recover 
Equation  8.10.
Note:  The  logarithm  of  a  nep•ative  number  is  defined  by  1n(—z)  =   ln(z)  -1-  ion, 
where  n  is  an  odd  integer.  If  this  formula  is  new  to  you,  try  exponentiating  both 
sides,  and  you'll  see  where  it comes  from.



8.2  TUNNELING                                                                                      
                                                         

So far,  I  have assumed  that  E  >  V,  so  p(.x)  is real. But  we can  easily  write down the  
corresponding   result  in  the  nowt classical  region  (E   <   V)—it’s  the  same  as

Sectioti  8.2:  Tunneling         321

before  (Equation  8.10),  only  now  p(.i)  is  iinogfnoy :'


[8.17)


Consider,  for  example,  the  problem  of  scattering  from  a  rectangular  barrier with  a  
bumpy  top (Fig•ure  8.3).  To  the left of  the  barrier  (.r  < 0),

J(x) =  Ae'””  +   Ben  '”” .                                    [8.18]

where  A is the incident amplitude,  B  is the reflected  amplitude, and k         2      /ñ (see 
Section  2.5).  To  the  rip•ht  of  the  barrier  (.r  > o),


(.r)       Fe'’L’  ;
F  is the  transmitted  amplitude,  and  the transmission  probability  is



In  the  tunneling  region  (0  < x  < a), the WKB  approximation  gives
[8.19]

D
**"* '     »fi""”fi(-•) ""*’ "**’ '“*’

















FIGURE 8.3:   Scattering from a rectangular barrier with a bumpy top.

- In  this case  the  wave  function  is real, and  the aiialogs  to Equations 8.6 and 8.7 do not 
follow iieces.»aril›'  from  Equation  8.5. altht›ugli  they are still .sirJ‹•ieiit. If’ this 
bothers you, study the alternative derivatlon  in  Problem  8.2.

322          Ch ipter 8    The WKB  Approximatioti









FIGURE 8.4:    Qualitative structure  of  the wave function,  for scattering  from  a high, broad 
barrier.

If the barrier is very  high and/or  very  wide (which is to say, if the probability of tunneling 
is small), then the coefficient of the exponentially  inci easing  term (C) must  be small  (in  
fact,  it  would  be  zero  if  the  barrier  were  infiiiitel ¿'  broad),  and the wave function 
looks something like" Figure  8.4. The relative amplitudes of  the incident  and  transmitted  
waves  are determined  essentially  by  the total  decrease  of the exponential  over  the  
nunclassical  region:
F
A

so that

T  =  e        .      with  p       —         | J›(.v)| d.   .
0



Example  8.2     Gamow's  theory  of alpha decay.4  In  1928, George  Gamow  (and, independently, 
Condon and Gurney) used Equation  8.22 to provide the first success- ful explanation of alpha decay 
(the spontaneous emission of an alpha-particle—two protons  and two neutrons—by  certain  
radioactive  nuclei).5 Since  the alpha particle
carries  a positive charge (2e). it  will  be electrically  repelled  by  the leftover nucleus 
(charge   Ze),  as  soon  as  it  gets  far  enough  away  to  escape  the  nuclear  binding force. 
But  first it has to negotiate  a potential  barrier  that  was already  known (in  the

Galnow  approxiniatcd  the  potential  energy  by  a  hnite  square  well  (representing the 
attractive  nuclear force), extending  out  to i    (the  radius of  the nucleus),  joilied

For   a   more   complete   discussion.   and   altei•nativc   formulations.   see   B.arry   R. 
Holstcin. "For  an  interesting  brief  history  see  Eupen  Mcrxbacher.  “The  Early  Hist‹ir}'  
of  Quantum  Tui-
leling,”  Phvsit x To‹lov.  August  2002.  p. 44.







Coulomb repulsion







Nuclear binding




FIGURE 8.5:    Gamow's   model   for  the  potential  energy   of  an  alpha  particle   in  a
radioactive  nucleus.

to a repulsive coulombic  tail (Figure 8.5), and identified  the escape oiechanlsm  as quantuiii  
tunneling  (this  was,  by  the  way.  the  first  time  that quantuiii  mechanics had  been  
applied  to nuclear  physics).
If  6  is the energy  of the emitted  alpha  particle,  the outer turninp• point (r,) is determined 
 by
1     2Ze-
4   >0
The exponent     (Equation  8.22)  is evidently‘

2Zc•‘  —  E    di  —        '
i                                h         ,-

The  integral  can  be  done  by  substitution  (let  r      r• sin' ii),  and  the  result  is



Typically,  › 1  << r„   and  we can simplify  this  result  usin•g  the small  anp•1e  approxi- 
mation  (sin e =  e):

2

'In    this ciise  the  poielitial  does  ncer  drtip  tu  zei o on  the  lel't  side of’ the  
barrier (inoi covci’.  this  is ic‹illy  a  thiee-dimcnsic›nal  problem).  but  the essential  
idea.  contained  in Equation  8.22.  is  all  we  rc•ally rice  .


324           Cl› ipter 8    The WKB  Approx itn ition


where



and

=  1.980 MeV'''.


'    =   1.485 fm*1   .

[8.26]



[8.27]


[One  fermi  (fm) is 10*'"  m,  which  is about  the size of a typical  nucleus.]
lf  we  imagine  the  alpha  particle  rattling  around  inside  the  nucleus,  with  an

2r  /r, and  hence  the /reqi‹en‹    of collisions  is u/2i-l.  The probability  of escape  at each 
collision  is e*'*, so the probability  of emission,  per unit  time, is (r/2r  )c*' ’,

2›-i„z,               [8.28)
Unfortunately,  we don't  know  r—but  it  hardly  iTlatters,  for  the exponential  factor varies  
over  a  |ñtitastic   range  (twenty-five  orders  of  magnitude),   as  we  go  from

insignificant. In particular, it’you plot the logtii itlun of the experimentally measured lifetime  
against  I /    E, the  result  is a  beautiful  straight  line (Figure  8.6),’  just  as




Problem 8.3  Use Equation  8.22  to calculate  the  approxiiiiate  transmission  prob-

Vn  >   E  and  width 2‹i. Compare  your answer  with  the exact  result  (Problem  2.33). to  
which  it  should  reduce  in  the  WKB  regiiiie  T  44.1.


le                                                     -*'
8.28.  ffin/.  The density of  nuclear  matter  is  relatively  constant  (i.e.,  the same for a    
n  c ei    so           is  proport on     to       t  e    u     er  o   neutrons  p us  protons 
Empirically,
r   =   ( 1.07  fni) A1 '".                                                    [8.29]

7Froni  David  Park.  liitrodiirliott  to  tfie  Q_iianniiii  Th •m;.  .Sr d  cd.,  McGraw-Hill  
(1992);  it  was
:idanled  mum  I   Prrl man  und  I   CI   ltasrrnissen   “A  lnh:i  R:idi‹i:ml ivii v ”  Fri   x ‹ 
lonrrlin   it‘Plts »i -‹   V‹il   42
Springer  (19.57). This material  i.s reproduced  with  pcrnii.s.sitin tel’ The McGl-aw-Hill  
Companies.

Sect.ioti  8.3:  The Cotitie€tion  Fot'iwulas          325
u238







232


22B


228
226



MeV

FIGURE  8.6:    Graph  of  the  logarithm  of  rhc  lifetime  versus  1/          where  E   is  
the energy  of  the emitted  alpha particle),  for uranium  and  thorium.

The energ•y  of the emitted alpha particle can be deduced  by using Einstein’s formula
(E  =  me-):
[8.30]

where io , is the mass of the parent nucleu.s, ir,t is the mass of the daughter  nucleus,
                                       and  nip  is  the  mass  of  the  alpha  particle  (which  
is  to  say,  the  He   nucleus).  To              figure out what  the daughter  nucleus  is, note 
that  the alpha  particle carries off  two
ons

potential energy  inside the nucleus, and suiely  uuderestitiiciies  v,  but it's about  the best  
we can  do  at  this  stage.  Incidentally,  the  experimental  lifetimes  are 6 x  10



8.3  THE CONNECTION  FORMULAS                                                                       
 

the  barrier) are  i ct iff6/, SO that  the “exterior”  solutioli  is simple,  and  the  boundary 
conditions  trivial.  AS  lt  turns  out,  our  iiiain  results  (Equations  8.16  and  8.22)  are 
reasonably  accurate  even  when  the  edges  are  not  so  abrupt  (indeed,  in  Gamow's theory  
they  were  applied  to just  such  a case).  Nevertheless,  it  is of  some  interest to study  
more  closely  what  happens  to  the  wave  function  at  a  turnhig•  point  (E Y),  where  the  
“classical”  region  joins  the  “nonclassical”  re•qioli,  and  the  WKB

326          Chapter  8     The  WKB  Approxiit1HtlOt1

Linearized
la

Turning
point







Patching region

Classical             O         Nonclassical

FIGURE  8.7:    Enlarged  view of  the right-hand  turning  point.

approximation  itself  breaks down. In  this section  I'll treat  the bound  state probleln (Figure 
8. I); you  get  to do the scattering  problem  for  yourself  (Problem  8.10).


occurs  at .r =  0 (Figure  8.7).  In  the WKB  approximation, we  have
1
(Y   )



[8.31]
if .i  > 0.

(Assuming  P(.i) remains  p•reater  than  E  for all  .v  >   0,  we can exclude the positive 
exponent  in  this  region,  because  it  blows  up  as      —r  en.)  Our  task  is  to join  the 
two  solutions  at  the  boundary.  But  there  is  a  serious  dilficu1ty  here:  In  the  WKB 
approximation,       goes  to iiiJiiin   at  the  turning  point  (where  p{.v)        0).  The ti 
me wave  function,  of  course,  has  no  such  wild  behavior—as  anticipated,  the  WKB method  
simply  fails  in  the  vicinity  of’ a  turning  point.  And  yet,  it  is precisely  the boundary 
 conditions  at  the turning  points that determine  the allowed energies.  What we need  to do,  
then,  is  splice  the  two  WKB  solutions  top•ether,  using  a “patching” wave  function  that  
straddles  the  turning  point.
Since  we only  need  the  patching  wave  function  (Jq) in  the  nelghborhood  of
the  origin,  we’11   IQ› mm.vilt7nte  llie   ›olrnliril  h;• n .str night  line:






re:iding.
Wanting:  The  lollowinp  argulncnt  is  qtlite  iechnic.tl,  alid  you  may  wish  to  skip  it  
on  ii  first

Sectioti  8.3:  The Contie  tioti  ForfnulffS        327
and  solve  the Schrddinpei  for this liliearized  P:

/i²  d'- f
2ri   dx2
+ v  + r’lo)vj¿„     z jU,
[8
2»
The a's   can  be  absorbed  into  the  independent  variable  by  defining
so that
[8.36]

This  is  Airy's  equation,  and  the  solutions  are  called  Airy  functions.    Since  the Airy  
equation  is  a  second-order  differential  equation,  there  are  two  linearly  inde- pendent  
Airy  functions,   Ai(z)  and  Bi (z).

TABLE 8.1:     Sonic  properties  of  the  Airy  functions.



Linear combinations  of Airy  Functions,  Ai(.) and Di{z).

liiteSi‹iI  £cj›ieseiiIciIiaii:     A/(z) =  -    COS  3



:  0.



'!Cl‹i. .si‹°‹ilI;'.  a  linct r  p‹›tciJtiill  iJ\ctiiJs  ‹t  col\st:iiJt  toi‘cc.  and  lJciJcc  
:   c‹1n.stant  accclcratic›n —tllc simplest  I\‹1ntrivi:tI  incliun  yc.ssihlc.  and  the  s‘r 
i///›i,¿  p‹›int  her  cleincnlary  mccIJ‹inics.   It  is  ircnic  that tIJe  same  potential  ill  
‹/iin/////rH   nJeclJanics  yis'cs  rise  tu  uiJt oil\iIiar  ti an.sccndcntal  luncliuns.  and  
plays unly  z\  pci”ipIicraI  role  in  tile  theory.






2.0 -
1 A
1.6 —




0.5










-8  -6  -4  -2  0   2   4
1 .0  —J




1 1›° 1  ¥* I  i \i'    i  /

——.6
——.8
--1.0




They  are related  to Bessel  functions  of order  1/3; some of  their properties  are listed  in 
Table  8.1  and  they  are plotted  in Figure  8.8.  Evidently  the  patching  wave unc ion  is  a  
 inear  com  ina ion  o

,(.   )       ‹i Ai(a’.  ) —|-  l›Bi (a.1 ).                                             [8.37)

e cons
Now      ,  is the (approximate)  wave function  in the neighborhood  of the origin: our job  is  
to  match  it  to the  WKB  solutions  in  the  overlap  regions  on  either  side see     gure     
           ese o  er ap zones are    ose enoug     o    e tu     ng po nt  t  a  t linearized  
potential  is  reasonably  accurate  (so  that      ,  is  a good  approximation  to the  true  
wave  function),  and  yet  far  enough  away  from  the  turning  point  that  the WKB  
approximation  is reliable."’  In  the  overlap  regions  Equation  8.32 holds.  and



f2(.r)
EQ— (
V  (0).r) =  ha  '‘            .                     [8.38]








!*This  is a  rlclic‹\tc  Jt›ublc  c‹›nslraint   and  ii is p‹›ssibIc  t‹1 ccmcuct  pctcntialx  x‹› 
 pathulcpical  that n‹› such  overlap  rcgiun  exists.  H(›wcvcr.  in  practical  app1ic‹iticns  
this seldom  uccui's.  Sec Pr‹›hlcm  8.5.

Section 8.3:  The Connection  formulas         329





JWKB                                                                                                
                                                     /WKB








Overlap 1
WTurning
nnint
Patching region
Overlap 2

FIGURE  8.9:     Patching  region  and  the two overlap zones.

and theiefore  the  WKB  wave function  (Equation  h.31) can  be written  as

[8.39]

Meanwhile.   rising   the  large--  asyinptotic   forms' '   of  the  Airy  functions  (front
Table  8.1 ), the patching wave function (Equation  8.37) in overlap region 2 becomes



Coiiipai inp•  the  two solutions,  we see that

[8.41]

Now  we  g•o  back  and  repeat  the  procedure  for overlap  rcglon  1.  Olice  ap•ain, J›(.i)  is 
p•iven  by  Equation  8.38,  brit  this  time .v  is iiegriiive.  so

f'

and  the  WKB  wave  function  (Equation  8.3 I) is


ro    a n1





' ' At  ñi st  jlancc  it  seems  absurd  tt›  use a  l‹iip‹•-..  appi oxiiuation  iii  lhi.s  
rc•gion,  which  ‹i1'tcr  ‹ill  is suppc›sed  to  be  1 e‹Lsoliably  close  to  ltte  tuivilig  
point  at  .   =   0 (so  that  the  lineai  approxilii•ition  to  the poicluiai  is  vaiiuJ.  out  
hoiicc  mar  tire  arguiuciu  iicl c  is a.i .  and  it  you  siuiiy  tire  iu•iiicr  carefuiiy  
tsec Problem  h.8)  you  will  find  that  thele  i.v  (typically   :t  1 cgitin  iti  w'hich  e.r  
is  large.  but  at  the  salrie  time it ix inixoiwtle to appnoxin:nc V(a) hy a straigln hnc.


e                e                        o             o

Meanwhile,  rising  the  asymptotic  form  of  the  Airy  function  for  large  negfi/ive  ‹-
(   a  le     1)   t  e  pa c      g   u  ct on (Eq   at o         7                       ) rea  s


›'  '.
»,y(_-•ev),g, sin   ²
4




Comparing  the WKB and patchilig wave functions  in overlap rep•iOli  1, we  find




or,  putting•  in  Equation  8.41  for o:



These  are  the so-called  connection  formulas,  joining  the  WKB  solutions  at either si  e  o  
 t  e  tu     ng  po nt       e re    oi e  w  t    t  e  pa c    ng  wave    unc ion  now      it 
only  purpose  was  to  bridge  the  gap.  Expressing  everything  in  terms  of  the  one 
normalization  constant  D,   alid  shitting  the turning  point  back front  the oi‘igin  to an 
arbitrary  point  .r„   the  WKB  wave  funCtlOR  (Equation  8.31)  becomes


2D
p(.  )
1       ""
sin    —           y(.v’) ‹1.v’ It     ,
D         exp        1       " |/›(.r’)| cl.s             it  .v  >   .r,.





that  has  one  vertlcal  side  (at  .i   =   0)  and  one  sloping  side  (Figure  8.10).  In  
this case     (0) =  0, so Equation  8.46 says

Section 8.3:  The Conrectioii  Forums/ds         331
Vax)





E









2




FIGURE 8.10:     l'otentiai  weir  witii one verticai  wait.
For instance, consider  the *half-harmonic oscillator,”
if x  > 0, otherwise.
In  this case


where
1     2E

is the turning  point. So

4
and  the quantization  condition  (Equation  8.47)  yields


i„=
/
2n— 2/
In this particular case the WKB approximation  actually  delivers the e.fact  allowed energies 
(which are precisely  the odd  energies of the/u//  harmonic oscillator—see Problem  2.42).


332          Chap ter 8    The  IVKB  Approxun itioii


Example 8.4    Potential  well with no vertical walls.  Equation  8.46 connects  the WKB   wave  
functiOlis   at  a   turning   point   where  the  potential   slopes  upwurd

(Figure  8.11(b)).  yields  (Problem  8.9)


exp   ——          |y(.v  )|  1.x     .     if .v  <   .<l .
(   )                '

[8.50]
i ›:""(›-'‹Hi„
In  narticular.  if  we’re  ta1kinp•  about  a  potential  i‹ell  (Fip•ure  8.11(c)).  the  wave 
function  in the “interior”  region  (.r   < .r  < .t,) can  be written  either  as





am

—2D’

sin 8  (.r),     where 6,(



sin 81 t-•).     where
1
4”


1 f-' p(.v') d.v'  —

(Equation  8.50). Evidelitly  the arguments of the sine functions must be equal, mod-
uio v:1   6, -  a, -r ..r, rrona  which  it follows  that


with  n      1.                                   [8.5 l]








E                                      E                                      E




’2

(a)
’1


(b)
‘1                                       ’2

(c)

FIGURE g.11:    Upward-sloping and downward-sloping turning points.


''Nor  2n —an  t›vcrall  minus .sign  can  be ab.sorbed  into  the normalization  t'actors  D -and  
D'.






case  of  a  potential  well  with  two  sloping  sides.  Notice  that  it  differs  from  the 
formulas for two vertical  walls (Equation  8.16) or’ one vertical  wall (Equation  8.47)

approximation  works  besi  th  the seliii-classical (larp•e n) rep•ime,  the distinction  is more  
in  appearance  than  in  substance.  In  any  event,  the  result  is  extraordinarily powerful, 
fOr it eliables us to calculate (approximate) allowed energies il•ii/tour ever

function  itself  has dropped  out of sight.



em           onsi  er    e quan               anica  ana             e c a‹ s               end o



negative .i,  the potential  is inquire—the  ball can‘t  poet  there at all.)
(b)  Solve the Sc1iriidinp•er equatioli  for  this  potential,  expressing  your answer  in terms 
of  the appropriate  Airy  function  (note that  Bi(z) blows up for large z,
mus                         je             on
si                                                    :g,
in  jnMles   correct tn three si•nificani  rli wits   will/    See  Miltnn  Ahranznwitz  anrl Irene 
 A. Steguli,  Hniidbook  of  Mailiemnticol  Fi,mctioiis,  Dover,  New  York (1970),  page 478; the 
notation  is defined  on  page 450.
(d)   What  is  the  ground  state  energy,  in  eV,  of  an  election  in  this  gravitational

the  viria)  theorem  to  determine  (.v).

sProblem 8.6  Analyze  the  bouncing  ball  (Problem  8.5)  using  the  WKB  approxi-

(a)   Find  the  allowed  energies,  Ed,,  in  terms  of iii,  p,  and  /i.
(b)   Now  put  in  the  particulai   values  given  in  Problem  8.5(c),  and  compare  the WKB  
approxiiiiation  to the  first  four  energies  with  the  “exact” results.

an  average  height  of, say,  l  meter above  the ground?



''For more on the quantum  bouncing  ball sec J. Gea-B‹inac loche. lie. J.  Phd s. 67. 776 (1999) 
and

report  (2002). This  may  sound  like an  awfully  an ilicial  probleln,  but  the  experiment  
has actually  been


334         Chapter  8    The WKB  Approxiniatiott


sProblern  8.7  Use  the  WKB  approximation   to  find  the  allowed  energies  of  the harmonic  
oscillator.


harmonic  oscillator  (angular  frequency  n›).


(b)  How  far  (d)  could  you  go  nbove  the  turning  point  before  the  error  in  the 
linearized  potential  (Equation  8.32,  but  with  the  turning  point  at .i2) reaches 17a?  That 
 is,  if

I(.TJ  +  d)          lin(-*2 +    d)    =  0.01.
V(.r;)
what  is d*
(c)  The asymptotic  form  of  Ai(z)  is accurate  to  l'7r  as           as z      5. For  the f/ 
in part (b), determine  the smallest  n  such  that ad      5. (For any  ii  larger  than this  
there  exists  an  overlap  region  in  which  the  linearized  potential  is  good to  17a   mid  
the  large-.  form  of  the  Airy  function  is good  to  1 'Tc.)

s    Problem  8.9  Derive   the   connection   formulas   at   a   downward-sloping   turning‘ 
point,  and confinn  Equation  8.50.

s s sProblem  8.10  Use  appropriate  connection   formulas   to  analyze   the  problem  of 
scattering  from  a  barrier  with  sloping  walls (Figure  8.1 2). hint:  Begin  by  writing ihe 
WKB  wave  function  in  the form



(.t)                 (   )     Ce'      '!          '   ’"' +   De  !      !      '’'   '   '“'    
.  (x   <  .v  <  .\2):

1                                                                                   (.r  >  .r  ).  
        f8.52)

Do  not   assume  C    =    0.  Calculate   the  tunneling   probability,   T           F '/   A 
’‘.
and  show  that  your  result  reduces  to  Equation  8.22  in  the  case  of  a  broad,  high

Further Prohletns [or Ch ipter 8         335








*2

FIGURE 8.12:    Barrier with sloping  walls.

FURTHER PROBLEMS FOR CHAPTER 8

s sProblem 8.11  Use  the  WKB  approximation  to  find  the  allowed  energies  of  the



where  r  i.s  a  positive  number.  Check  your  result  for  the case     =   2.  Aiisii!ei. "


[8.53]



s sProblem  8.12  Use the WKB approximation  to find  the  bound  state energy  for  the potentlal  
in Problem  2.5 l.  Compare  the exact  answer.  Ariel› ei:   —[(9/8) — (l/       2)]


Problem  8.13  For  spherically   symmetrical   potentials  we  can   apply   the  WKB 
apFroxiination to the i-adia1 part (Equation 4.37). In the case /      0 it is reasonable'" to use  
Equation  8.47 in  the form


'   p(i-) cli  —— (ii  —  1/4)nf:.


As :iliva\•s.  the WKB  resum  is most accurate  in  the semi-classie‹i1 (large Equ:it ion  8.5.3 
is not  very good for the ground state (ii  =   I ). See W.  N. Mei. Am.
[8.54)


541  (1998).
'"  Application  of  the  WKB  appi ox imation  to  the  radial  equation  raises  solne  delicate  
alid  subtle problems.  which  I  w'ill  not  go  into  here.  The  classic  paper  on  the  
subject  is  R.   Langer.  Ph5’s.  Rev.  o1, 669 ( 1937).


336           Chapter 8    The  WKB  Approxiitiatioi1

where  rb  1s  the  turning  polnt  (in  effect.  we  treat  i-  =    0  as  an  infinite  wall). 
Exploit  this formula to estimate the allowed energies of a particle in the loparlthmic potential

V(i   ) =    Vo In(/ /n)

(for constants  Y) and n]. Treat only the case I  =  0. Show that  the spacing  between the levels  
is independent  of  mass.  Pm ticil mist ver:




• •Problem  8.14  Use  the WKB  approKimation  in  the form

[8.55]

to estimate the bound state energies for hydrnp•en. Don't forp•et  the centrifup•a1 term in  the 
effective  potential  (Equation  4.38). The following  integral  may  help:


(           )(l         )

Note that  you  recover  the Bohr  levels  when  o 1.1 and  nI     1/2. Aiisii'ei .

E                     — I 1.6    cV
"     [i›  — (1/2) -I-      (   -I-  I )]'  ”
[8.56]



[8.57]


+Problem 8.15  Consider  the  case  of  a  synUnetrical  double  well, .such  as  the  one pictured 
 in Figure 8.13. We are interested  in  bound  states  with  £  <  V(0).
f a)   Write down the WKB wave functions in regions fi) .v  > .   . (ii) .v   < .r  < .i  . and  
(iii) 0 < a  < cvi. Impose the appropriate  connection  formulas  at .r   and
.r,  (this  has  already  been  done,  in  Equation  8.4b,  for .r›:  you  will  have  to
work  out .=i for yourselo.  to show  that
D                     i

exp   ——/:    „

+    4
I
2 cos 0e!!
(i)

(ii)

J   ,    (iii)



















where


(b)  Because  V(.  )  is  symmetric,  we  need  only  consider  even  (-1-)  and  odd  (—) wave 
functions. In the former case /'(0)      0, and in the latiel  case /(0) =  0. Show  that  this 
1e.ads  to  the  following  quantization  condition:




where
tali 8 —     2e  ,

1
[8.59J

h    —.1'
p(.i’) | d.  '.
[8.60]
Equation  8.59  detennines  the  (approximate)  allowed  energies  (note  that  E
comes  into .v   and .v„ so 6  and  Q are  both  functions  of  €).
(c)   We are particularly  interested  in a high and/or  broad central  barrier, in  which case  Q  
is  large.  and  e    is  /i«,ye.  Equation  8.59  then  tells  us  that  8  must  be very  close  
to  a  half-integer  multiple  of  u.   With  this  in  mind,  write  P  = (it  +  1/2)a  + c,  
where  |r |  «   1,  and  show  that  the  quantizatioli  Condition becomes


(d)  Suppose  each  well  is a  parabola:"






'”Even  if  1’ (.r)  is  not  slrictl y  p‹ii‘abolic  in  citch  well.  this  ciilcul‹ition  tel’ 
(?.  and  hence  the  result (Equation  8.631  will  be ‹i ›pr‹›.s iiii‹il‹•l;   correct.  in  the  
scnse  discn.seed  vt  the  beginning  ol’ Section  2.3, with  to      ,      ”(  tj )/    .  whel 
e .vq  i.s  the  posititin  ol’ tlic  rniniliiuni.


er            ›e

Sketch  this potential,  find  8  (Equation  8.58),  and  show  that




simply  have  two detached  harmonic  oscillators,  and  the energies,  £„   =   (ii -1- 1/2)/im.  
would  be doubly  degenerate.  since  the  particle  could  be  in  the  left well or in the ri=qht 
one. When the barrier becoinesJiiiiir (putting  the two wells into  "Colnniunication"), the  
dep•eneracy  is  lifted.  The even  states (/     )  have slightly  lo›i rr  energy.  and  the odd  
ones (J,¿) have  slightly  higher  energy.
(e)   Suppose  the  particle  starts  out  in  the  ring/ii   well—or,  more  precisely,  in  a ate 
o           orni

w(.v. o) =      ‹y‹,} + b„ ).

which,  assuliiing  the phases  are picked  in  the “natural"  way,  will  be concen- trated  in  
the  right  well.  Show  that  it  oscillates  back  and  forth  between  the wells,  with  a    
criod


(f)   Calculate Q. for the specific potentlal in part (d), and show that for  V(0)       E,


Problem  8.16  Tunneling  in  the Stark  effect.  When  you  turn on  an external  elec- tric  
field,  the  electron  in  an  atom  can.  in  principle,  tunnel  out,  ionizing  the  atom. 
Qii‹•sti‹›ii:   Is  this  likely  to  happeli  in  a  typical  Stark  effect  experilnent?   We  
can estimate  the probability  using  a crHde one-dimensional model,  as follows.  Imagine

(a)   What  is the energy  of  the  ground  state,  liieasured  up front  the  bottom  o1’ the 
well‘?  As.sume  Vo  »    /:‘/'»o'.  Hiiii:  This  is just  the  ground  state  eliergy  ot the  
iq$nirr  square  well (of  width  2«).
(b)   Now   introduce  a  pertulbation   If'    =    —m.r  (for  an  electron  in  an  electric
.,  i  we  won      rave  a  —  e               ssume  it  is  relatively  wea

now  tunnel  ont,  in  the direction  of  positive .r.
(c)   Calculate   the   tunneling   factor   y   (Equation  8.22),   and  estimate   the   tiine it 
  would   take   for   the   particle   to  escape  (Equation  8.28).   Ariel‹Rei .

(d)   Put  in .soine  reasonable  numbers:  <0 =  20 eV  (typical  binding  energy  for an ouier  
eiectronJ,  «  =  10   '    m  ttypicai  atomic  radiusJ.  •   «i  =    '  =  i°“   v/•' (strong  
laboratory   field),  e  and  iii  the  charge  and  mass  of  the  electron.  Cal- culate  r,  and 
coiiipare  it  to  the  age of  the universe.

Problem 8.17  About  how  long would it take for a can of beer at room temperature to topple over 
spontaneously, as a result  of quantum  tUlineling?  flirts:  Treat  it  as a

height  of  the  center  above  its  equilibrium  positiOll  (ft /2).  The  potential  energy  is 
ning.r,  and  it  topples  when  .v  reaches  the  critical  value  .i’9  —      R!   +   (li/2)! — 
/i/2. Calculate  the tunneling  probability  (Equation  8.22),  for  E       0. Use Equation  8.28, 
with  the  thermal  enerq•y  I(1/2lni r'   —  1.1 /2Ok • T)    to estimate  the  velocity.  Put  in 
reasonable  numbers,  and  give  your  final  answer  in  years.'⁷





















' 7R.  E.  Ci.ind:ill,  Scienti/c dnierfc ‹iii,  Febl-uary   1997,  p.  74.












CHAPTER  I


PERTURBATION  THEORY




Up  to  this  point,  practically  everything  we  have  done  belongs  to  the  subject  that 
might properly  be called quantum statics,  in which the potential  energy  function  is 
iiidr.rieiicleiit  o/iime:  Y(r.   ) —  V(r). In  that case  the (time-dependent) Schiiidinp•er 
equation,



+(r  r) -   p(r)e-"''".
where     (r) satisfies  the time-independent Schrodinger  equation,



factor (e* ""'),  which cancels out  when  we construct  the physically  relevant quai- tity  |T 
|',  all  probabilities  and expectation  values are constant  in  tiine.  By  footing litre ii  
‹’omhiii  idioms  of  these  stationary  states  we obtain  wave  functions  with  inoie 
interesting  tiiiie  dependence,  but  even  then  the  possible  values  of  the  energy,  and 
their  respective  probabilities,  are constant.
If  we  want  to  allow  for  transitions  (quantum  jumps,  as  they  are  sometimes

potential  (quantum  dynamics).  There  are precious  few  exactly  solvable  problems


Sectioti  9.1:  Ttuo-Lr.t el S ystenis          341

in  qriantinn  dynamics.  However,  ir the  time-dependent  portion  of  the  Hamiltonian is .small 
 compared  to the time-independent  part, it can  be treated  as a perturbation. My  purpose  in  
this chapter  is to develop  tiiiie-dependent perturbation  theory, and stridy  its  most  
important  application:  the  emission  or  absorption  of  radiation  by an  atom.

9.1  TWO—LEVEL SYSTEMS
To  begln  with.  let  us  suppose  that  there  are  just  Evo  states  of  the  (uliperturbed)
system,  J„   and  Jt,. They  are eigenstates  of  the  unperturbed  Hamiltonian,  N':

[9.1]


and  they  ai c  orthonormal:


Any  state can  be expressed  as a  linear combination  of  them;  in  particular,
‹(o) = c„;„+ ‹„Y».

[9.2]


[9.3]

The .states  /„   and   f,   might  be  position-space  wave  functions,  or  spinors,  or 
so1rlethiIip•  more exotlC—it  doesn't  matter;  it  is the liitle  dependence  that concerns us  
liei'e,  so  when  I  write  T(r),  I  simply  mean  the  state  of  the  system  at  time  i.

exponential  factor:


We  say  that  |‹’„ |'   is  the  “probability  that  the  particle  is  in  state  J,”—by  which 
we  i eall;  iiic-an  the  probability  that  a  measurement  of  the energy  would  yield  the


[9.5]

9.1.1  The Perturbed  System
Now  suppose  w'e  turn  on  a  time-dependent  perturbation,  f/’(r). Since  /,    and  J, 
constitute  a  coiiiplete  set   the  wave  function  W Ir)  ran  still  he expressed  as a  linear 
combination  of  them.  The only  difference  is  that  c„  and  c;, are Row  [tmc'tioiis  of t:

[9.6]

(I  CO£l)d   ilbsorb   the  exponential   factors   into  i.’„ (r)  and   c  ,(t),  and  soine  
people prefer  to  clo  it  this  way,  but  I   think  it   is  nicer  to  keep  visible  that  
part  of   the


342          Cl aptet  9    Time-Depetfdetit Perturhatioti  Tf›eoi J›

time dependence  that  would  be present  even  ii ii/tool  the perturbation.) The  whole problem  
is to determine c‘„  and c „  as functions of tiiiie. If, for example.  the particle started out  
in  the state  J„    (c„(0) =   1, ‹  ,(0) =  0), and at  soine  later time il  we find that  c„(r  
) =   0, c'i›Hi I ) =    1,  we.  shall  report  that  the  system  underwent  a  transition from   
f„   to  f,.
We solve for’ c.’„ (r) and      (r) by demanding  lhat     (t) satisfy  the time-dependent
Schrodinger  equation.


H T  =  i/i 'Or
Froin  Equations  9.6 and 9.7,  we find:
where  H       H⁰ +  If'(i).
[9.7]






_ i E„



on  the rip•ht, and  hence
c,[n’/,]‹-’  „'/«+•„ly',j„, j•-'-E''i»=iñ )i„/„‹-   E„'/«+i„{„»-"'''    )     [9.8]
To isolate  /„, we rise  the standard  ti ick: Take  the inlier  product  with  J„,   and explOlt  
the ortliogonaliry of  J„   and  f,   (Equation  9.2):



For short. we define
[9.9]

note  that   the  henniticity   of  H'   entails   f/  i    =   (ñ;J)*.  Multiplying   through   by
—(i f ñ)‹•' E  '!", we conclude  that:




Similarly,  the inner  product  with  J,   picks  orit  é,:
‹„I+i,in i*„) -''   'i   + ‹›,; y‹i,ln lt„)‹-'’f„'/‹ —— it:-„«-"“›"'".
and  hence
[9.11]

Sectioii 9.I.  Pico-Lerel S»steiits         343
Equations  9.10  and  9.11  determine  r„ (r)  and  c ,(r);  taken  together,  they  are 
coinpieieiy equivaient to tne ttlme-ciepencient j ficnrociinger equation, for a two-ievei system. 
Typically,  the diagonal  matrix  elements of  I-I’  vanish  (see Problem  9.4 for the general  
case):


If so,  the equations simplify:




where


(I'll  assume that  E;, >  Eg, so =o s  0 )







E,   —  E,
[9.12]



[9.13]

sProblem 9.1  A  hvdroeen  atom  is Olaced  in  a  Itime-denendent) electric  field  E = E(i)1. 
Calculate all four matrix elements H,   of the perturbation  H'  =  ‹• E p- between the ground 
state (ii  =   l)  and the (quadruply  degenerate) first excited states (ii  =  2). Also show  that 
 H;’;  —— 0 for all  five states.  Note.-  There  is only  one  integral  to be
done  here,  if  You  exploit  oddness  with  respect  to c: only  one  of  the ii  =  2 states is 
“accessible”  front  the ground  state  by a  perturbation  of  this form, and  therefore the 
systeln functions  as  a  two-state  configuration—assuming transitions  to higher excited  states 
can  be ignored.

sProblem 9.2  Solve Equation  9.13 for the case ot a time-iiicle  ›etideiit  perturbation. assunung 
  that   cq (0)   —   1   and   c ,(0)   =    0.   Check   that   |r„ (i )|-  -1-   c › (t)  -   =  
   1. Connor cut:  Ostensibly,  this  system  oscillates  between  “pure  J„”    and  “soine   f   
.” Doesn't   this  contradict  my  genelal  assel ilon  that  no  transitlons  occur  for  time-
independent  perturbations? No. but  the reason  is rather  subtle:  Jn  this case  /„   and
/t, are not, and never were, eigenstates  of the Hamiltonian—a  measurement  of the energy  tiered  
 yields  E„   or  E;,. In  time-dependent  perturbation  theory  we  typically contemplate  turning 
 on  the perturbation  for a  while,  and  then  turning  it  oJ    again, in order  to examine  
the  system.  At  the  beginning,  and  at  the  end,  /„   and   f;,   ai e eigenstates  of  the  
exact  Hamiltonian,  and  only  in  this  context  does  it  make  sense yptha   the syste n 
undperwJenpt  atrans  tion f    m one t    the oher  For the Reset

off  again  at  time  / —this  doesn't  affect  the cnlciilatioiis, but  it  allows  for a  more 
sensible  interpretation of  the result.


H'      Ub(t):


344         Chap few’ 9    Time-Dependent  Per?nrfiniioii T/›eory

assume  that  U„„  ——  U› ›  ——  0,  and  let  U„   ——  U  „      a.  If  r„(—c›o)  =   1  and
ct(—on)  =  0, find c,(r) and ct(r), and  check  that   c„(t) '  +  ci,(t) '  =  1. What  is the 
liet  probability  (P,    , for  i  —+  c›s)  that  a  transition  occurs?  Hint:  You  might



9.1.2  Time-Dependent Perturbation TheorY

turbalion. But if  N' lS “Slnall.”  we can solve Equation  9.13 by a process of succes- sive 
approximations, as follows. Suppose  the particle starts out  in  the lower state:
c„(0)      1.     c/,(0)  — 0.                                        [9.15]



Zerot            er:


(I’ll  use a superscript  in  parentheses  to indicate  the order of  the approximatlon.) on  the 
right side of  Equation  9.13:





clcI“› '


approximation:

Second Order:
0     (;)   };

[9.17]



[9.18]



while c;, ’is  unchanp•ed  (cJ,   (i) =  r$,'  (i)). (Notice  thai  c ," (i)  iflPfIfde.r  the 
zeroth- order  tems;  the second-order  cor i memoir  would  be the integral  part alone.)


Section 9. 1:  Two-Lei el S ysteins         345
In  principle,  we  could  continue  this  ritual  indefinitely.  always  inserting  the

Oil
O            ]3]3  OXl        lO    1
O               lon                        so               o
(n  -1-  1)th  order.  The  zerotli  order  contains  no  factors  of  f/',  the  first-order  cor 
- rection  contains  otie  factor  of  f/',  the  second-order  correction   has  iii o  factors

not
o            n    so  on         e  e   or
›
e    r  t or  er  app ox        on   s  evl  e  t          e
Equation  9.5).  However,  |r  ,'  (i)|'  +   |r$,'  (i)|'  is  equal  to  I   ro  fit st  nidei   
iii   H’.
which  is  all  we  can  expcct  l'i oin  a  first-ordcl   approximation.  And  the  same  goes
ig  er or  ers.




in              er  pertur  atlOn  t  eory,          e case  c, (0




[9.19]






where

d„     —— e li
[9.20]


[9.21]

So  the  cquatiolis  lor  ‹l„  and  d,   arc  identical  in  structure  to  RquatlOlJ  9.13 (with  
an extra  factor  e'    tacked  onto  H’).
(c)   Use the method  in p‹irt  (b) to obtain r„(i) and c g(i) in first-order  perturbation theory, 
 and  coinpal e  yoUl  answer  to (a).  Coiniiient  on  any  discrepancies.

sProblem  9.5  Solve  Equation  9.13  to second  order  in  perturbation  theory.  for  the general 
 case  r’, (0) =  o.   c ,(0)     1›.

*Problem 9.6  Calculate  c‹,(t)  and  c5(t),  to  second  order,  for  a  tiine-lndependent 
perturbation  (Problem  9.2).  Compare  your answer  with  the exact  i esult.


c       a          s    i        c         ccy                      cr                      cc      
                 c              vu       n        c true  il’ the  perturbation  included  
di‹igt›n‹il  terms,  or  if  the  s) stern  started  out  in  ii  linear combination  ol’ flue  
tw'o  smites.


346          Clapter 9    Time-Dependetit Perturhntioii  Tfisor}•

9.1.3  Sinusoidal Perturbations
Suppose  the perturbation  has sinusoidal  time dependence:
COS                            9.22

where
[9.23]
(As  before,  I’11  assume  the  diagonal  matrix  elements  vanish,  since  this  is  almost 
always  the case  in  practice.) To  first  order (from  now  on we'll  work  e.icfnxive/y  in

—— V₍›n
e   («›’)‹='›’ di’ = —    "        «'”!“'•+”!'  + ‹’ ”'•"’ '    di’
2/I

v„   r'*'•"+•'—i
*2/t         wp+w
[9.25]

substantially  if  we  restrict  our  attention  to  driving  frequencies  (in)  that  are  very 
close to the tl ansitlOn  frequency (mb), so that the second  term in the square brackets



Thls  is  not  lnuch  of  a  llmitation,  since  perturbations  at  other   frequencies  have

we have


_  _  v!„, many(>,  —  >)r/zj  ; „,_„;,  ,
*        «         <   — <                                                    [9.27J
Thc  transition  probability—the  probability  that  a  particle  which  started  out  in the state 
 Jq   will be found,  at  time  r, in  the state  J,   —is

f9.28]



-    In llJc lo1Iuwin•_  scctiuns  we will be applying I his thcury tu llic chsc uT“ ling/f/, fuy 
\vhich ru      i
s             the denunzin3tur  in  ño/li  tcrms  is  hugc. cxccpt  (for  the sccuiJd  une)  in  
the  neighburlJucd  ufi «p.






P(i)







4x      6x

FIGURE 9.1:    Transition  probability  as a  function  of  time,  for  a  sinusoidal  perturba-
tion (En,uation  9 28)

The  most  remarkable  featui‘e  of  this  iesult  is  that,  as  a  function  of  time,  the ransi 
  on  pro  a     ity  osc        es   s nuso    a   y        gure                  e   r       g   
o  a   na   i mum  of  |V„t,|²//: (mt   —  in)-—necessarily  much  less  than  1.  else  the  
assumption that  the  perturbation   is  “small”  would  be  invalld—it  drops  back  down  to  
zero! At   times  i„   —  2flu/|mq  —  in|,  where  ii  —   1. 2, 3. ...   ,  the  particle  is  
c'ei tain   to

a  transition,  you  should  itot  keep  the  perturbation  on  for  a  longs  period;  you  do 
better  to  turii  if  o     after  a  time  u/|mq  — m|,  and  hope  to  “catch”  the  system  in
shupper  s ae     n oro   e            t            wt  at      s     opping     s  io   an na   i  
 ct

[i rqi,iriic '  is modified  somewhat.
As I noted  earlier,  the probability  of  a  transition  is greate.st  when  the driving frequency 
 is close  to  the “natural” fi'equency.  mq. This is illustrated  in  Figure  9.2, where  P.,      
is nlolted as a functiOll Of m. The neak has a hel Chi of 1 1*,.i. li /2/:1' and a  width  4s/i; 
evidently  it gets  higher  and  narrower  as  time  goes on.  (Ostensibly, the iiiaximuin 
increases without limit. However, the perturbation assumption  breaks









*0




FTPI IRF   9  2•     Trnnsitinn prnhahi)ity as a fHnctinn nf tJrivinp frequency (fiquatinn  9.2g).


348          Chapter 9    Time-Depetuleiit  Perturl›ation Theory

down before it gets close to 1, so we can believe the result Olily for relatively small
r. In  Problem  9.7 you  will  see  that  the e.rriri  iesult  never exceeds  1.)


• sProblem  9.7  The first  tern in Equation  9.25 comes froln the e"ᵘ'/2 part of cos(‹o/),
an       e  secon     rom  e                                                         tems  is       
        y  equiva ent


[9.29]


fei    to  pick  out  the  dominant  tenth  in  the  formula  analogous  to  Equation  9.25 for  c„ 
(i).)  Rabi  noticed  that  if  you  make  this  so-called  rotating  wave  approxi-

out
a     na       e
ec           tlO             ton            c  n   esove   e  acty
with  no  need  for  perturbation  theory,  and  no  assumption  aboui  the  strength  of the 
field.

the usual  initial conditions:  cq (0) =  1. c ,(0) =  0. Express your results (‹'„(i) and  c ,(i)) 
in terms of’ the  Rabi  flopping  frequency,



(b)   Detemiine  the transitlon probability.  P„     ,(t   , and show  thai it never exceeds
1.  COlifirlu  that  |c„ (i)|'  -1-   c ›(t 1 '        1.
(c)   Check  that  P„p ,(r) reduces  to the perturbation  theoi‘y  result  (Eqtlation  9.28)

this context,  as a constraint  on  U.
(d)   At  what  time  does  the  system  first  return  to  it.s  initial  state?



9.2  EMISSION AND ABSORPTION OF RADIATION                                              

ectromagnetic     aves

An  electromagnetic  wave  (I'll  refer  to  it  as  “lip•ht,'  though  it  could  be  infrared, 
ultraviolet.  microwave,  X-ray,  etc.;  these  differ only  in  their  frequencies)  consists of  
transverse  (and  mutually  perpendicular) oscillating  electric  and  iiiagnetic  fields (Figure  
9.3).  An  atom,  ln  the presence  of  a peaSsing  light  wave,  responds  prlmarily to  the  
electrlc  coiiiponent.  If  the  wavelength  is  long  (compared  to  the  size  of  the





Electric field






Direction of



Magnetic field

FIGURE 9.3:    An electromagnetic wave.

atom), we can ignore the s;›ritiril  varlation  in  the fields  the atolii, then, is exposecl to a 
sinusoidally  oscillating electric  field



(for the moment  I'll assume  the light  is monochroinatic. and  polarized  a1onp•  the ¿






[9.33]

Tvoicall           is  an  even  or  odd  function  of    ;  in  either  case  z      '   is  odd,  
and integrates  to  zero  (see  Problem  9.1  for  some  ex‹unp1e.s).  This  licenses  our’  usual 
assumption  that  the diagonal  matrix  elements of  H’  vanish.  Thus  the interaction  of

"Ftir visible li•'hl X      5000a. while the diameter of’ an atom i.s altiiintl  1  ñ.   str this 
approximation is  reasoniible:  hut  it  would  ii‹›/  be  for  X-ray.s.  Problem  9.2 I  explores  
the et'lect  ot’ spatial  s•ariation  ‹›l‘ the  field.
The energy  ot‘ ‹i charge   ;  in  a  static  field E  i.s  —       E     Mr.  Ynu  may  well  
t›bjcct  to  the  use  ot’ e                           n                             cs   y        
e      pc     c        c                     p  c    y     s         g             c pc
of oscillation  is  long  compared  to  the  time  it  tukcs  the chiirge  to  move  around  
(within  the  atrniil.
"As usu‹il,  we assume  the nucleus is heavy and staliORéllJl  1(  iS (hC W.we luncti‹›n  o1’ thc• 
elrCil’l3It

*The letter /s  is supposed  t‹i remind you o1’ electric dipole moment (for which. in 
clectro‹1ynain- ics,  the  letter  ;›  is customarily  used—in  this  context  it  is  rendered  as 
 ‹i squigs ly  y  t‹›  avoitl con1‘usitin with  moincntum).   Actually.  R   is  Ilie  
otI“-diaponiil   mutrix  element  of’  the  z  corrlpoliclit   o1’  the  dipole moment  operator.  
‹Jr.  Becausc•  tel’ its  ‹issociiition  with  electric  dipole  moment.s.  radiation  governed  by 
Equation  9.33  is called  electric  dipole  radiation:  it  is  overwhelmingly  the  dominant  
kiiitl,  ‹it  leust  in the  ›'isi blc  reei‹›n.  See  Problem  9.21   for  gencrall Z.II1OFIS  ilR 
    fC£lT11RO)Og   .

light  with  matter  is  governed  by  precisely  the  kind  of  oscillatory  perturbation  we
e ti  i N  i 9N       i rt    V  or•  t i rv ri    O    I     V      xzr i t I•t

[9.34]

9.2.2  Absorption, Stimulated Emission, and Spontaneous Emission
If an atorn  starts out  in the “lower” state  /„,   and  you shine  a polarized  inonochro- matte  
been of  li  ht  on it.  the ni'obabi1itv  of a transition  to  the  “unner”  state  d  .  is given 
 by  Equation  9.28,  which (in  view  of Equation  9.34)  takes  the  fol in

[9.35]


field. We say  that  it  has “absorbed  a photon”  (Figure  9.4(a)). (As I mentioned  ear- lier, 
the word “photon”  really  belongs  to quantum  electrodynamics [the quantum

cull  . But this language  is convenient,  as long as  you  don't  read  more  into  it  than is 
really  there.)
1 could, of course, go back and run the whole derivation for a system that starts

out e-vactlv i/ir Serie—except  that this time we're calculating  P,          |c’q(i) |-,  the 
probability  of  a tralisition  don•n  to the lower  level:

[9.36]

(It lie.s to come out this way     all we’re doing is switching ri ++ b,  which substitiltes
—‹     for  mo.  When  we  get  to  Equation  9.25  we  now  keep  the   first   term,  with
—>0  +  in  in  the  deliominator,  and  the  rest  is  the  same  as  before.)  But  when  you 
stop  to think  of  it,  this is  an absolutely  o.sr  ni.r/iix,p  result:  If  the  particle  is  
in  the caper  state,  and  you  shine  light  on  it,  it  can  make  a  transition  to  the  lo  
her  state, and in fact the probability of such a transition is exactly the saiiie as for a 
transition ups Hurd  from  the  /oirei  state. This  process,  which  was  iirst  predicted  by  
Einstein. is called stimulated  emission.




(a) Absorption                        (b) Stimulated  emission            (c) Spontaneous  emission

FIGURE 9.4:    Three   ways   in   which   light   interacts   with   atoms:   (a) absorption,
(b) stimulated  emission,  (c) spontaneous  emission.

Section 9.2:   Emission and Absorption  o[Radi ition          351

In  the case of stimulated  emission  the electromagnetic field  Harris  energy  gin() from  the  
atom;  we  say  that  one  photon  went  in  and  re o  photons  came  out—the original  one  that  
caused  the  transition  plus  another  one  from  the  transition  itself (Figure  9.4(b)).  This  
raises  the  possibility  of  ‹uuylificntioii,  for  if  I  had  a  bottle of  atoms,  all  in  the 
 upper  state,  and  triggered  it  with  a  single  incident  photon,  a

4, and  so on. We'd  have an enormous  number of  photons coming  out, all  with  the same  
frequency  and  at  virtually  the same  instant.  This  is, of  course,  the  principle

it  is essential  (for  laser  action)  to  get  a  luajority  of  the  atoms  into  the upper  
state (a so-called  population  inversion),  because   tbsorption  (which  en.ir.i  one  photon) 
competes  with  stimulated  emission  (which  ;   oduces  one);  if  you  started  with  an even  
mixture  of  the  two  states,  you'd  get  no  amplification  at  all.
There is a third mechanism  (in addition  to absorption  and stimulated emission) by  which 
radiation interacts  with matter; it is called spontaneous  emission.  Here an atom in the excited 
state makes a transition  downward,  with the release of a photon, but  without  any applied  
electromagnetic field  to initiate  the process (Figure  9.4(c)). This  is  the  mechanism  that  
accounts  for  the  typical  decay  of  an  atomic  excited

at  nll.  If  the  atoln  is  in  a  stationary  state  (albeit  an  excited  one),  and  there  is 
 no external  perturbation,  it  should  just  sit  there  forever.  And  so  it  would,  if  it  
were ieall›   free of all  external  perturbations. However,  in quantum  electrodynainics the 
fields  are  nonzero  cert  in  tlir  groun 1 Plate —j uzt  as  the  harmonic  oscillator  (for 
example)  has  nonzero  energy  (to  wit:  lie/2)  in  its  ground  state.  You  can  turn  out all 
 the  lights,  and  cool  the  room  down  to  absolute  zero,  but  there  is  still  soine 
electromap•netic  radiation  present,  and  it  is  this  “zero  point”  radiation  that  serves to 
catalyze  spolitaneous  emission.  When  you  come  right  down  to it,  there  is really no such 
thing  as ii iif¿'  spontaneous  emission;  it's ‹ill  stimulated  emission.  The only distinction  
to be made  is whether  the  field  that  does  the  stimulating  is une  that      ii
put  there,  or  one  that  God  put  there.  In  this  sense  it  is  exactly  the  reverse  of  
the classical  radiative  process,  in  which  it's all  spontaneous,  and  there is no such  thing 
as  stimulated  emission.
Quantum  electrodynamics  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  book,7  but  there  is  a
lovely  argument.  due  to  Einstein,H  which  interrelates  the  three  processes  (absorp- tion,  
stimulated   emission,   and  spontaneous   enllssion).   Einstein  did  not   identify the  
mecltcmi.sin  responsible  for  spontaneous  emission  (perturbation  by  the  ground- state 
electromagnetic  field),  but  his  results  nevertheless  enable  us  to calculate  the



Einstein's  paper   was  published  in  1'9 l7.    well  before  the  Schriidinger  equation.  
Quantum  e1ec- trtidYnaniics  comes  into  the  argument  via  the Planck  blnckbody  formula  
(Equation  5.113).  which  dates from  1900.


3.52          Chapter  9    ‘Jaime-Dependent  Pet tin h iiion Theory

spontaneous  emission  rate,  and  from  that  the  natural  lifetime of  an  excited  atomic 
state." Before we turn to that, however, we need to consider the response of an atom to  
non-monochromatic,  unpolarized,  incoherent  electromagnetic  waves coining  in from  all  
directions—such as it  would  Clicounter. for instance,  if  it  were iiniiiersed in  thermal  
radiation.

9.2.3  Incoherent Perturbations

The energy  density  in an electromagnetic wave  isˡ'
+0 Ea.                                    [9.371
where  Ep  is (as before)  the  amplitude  of  the  electric  field.  So  the  transition  pi'ob- 
ability  (Equation  9.36)  is (not  surprisingly)  proportional  to  the  enerp•y  density  of the 
fields:
2o               [(wt  — w)r/2]                           [9.38)
But  thls  Le  for  a monochromatic  wave.  at  a  single  frequency  m.  In  many  applica- tions  
the  system  is  exposed  to  electroiiiagnetic  waves  at  a  whole  rf1fi,JP  Of  fre- quencies;  
 in   that  case  ii   —+   p(ro)r/m.   whcrc   p(m)doa   is  the  energy   density   in the  
frequency  ranp•e  du›,  and  the  net  iralisition  probability  takes  the  form  of  an 
integral:  '


‹›

"For an intercstin*  alternative  ‹lerivation  thing  “iiD.11-Ol-the-pants" quiiniuiii  
clcctrodyn.iniics. see Pr‹›bleni  9.9.
'"D. Gl’il’fitlis.  liiti odiiclion  In Elecli  id; iinittiCS.  3fd  D•d.  (PrentiCC  Hall,  Upper  
 Saddlv  River.  NJ.
1999).  Section  '9.2.3.  lB  gcner‹il.  the energy  per  unit  volume  in  elccuomagnetic  fields  
is



For electroina#nctic  waves,  the electric  and  magnetic  c‹›ntributiolis are equal,  so



and  the  average  over  a  full  cycle  is  [e0  2) E¿) , since  the  average  ol‘ cos-  (or  
sin-)  is  1/2.
' ' Equation  9.39  iissunies  that  the  pcrtul Nations  at  dil'fcrent  frequencies  are  
iiideJirHr/‹iit,  so  that tlic  total  transition  prt›bability  is  a  sum  o1’  the  
iiidiviclual   prtib:abilities.  II’  the  dil'lercnl  components arc  coherent   
tpliasc-corielated).  then  we  should  .irld  oitv›litiidr s   try It) 1.  not  pi’olinhiliti‹'s  
(|‹ /,(/)|-).
and   there   will   be  cross-terms.   For   the   applications   we   will  consider   the  
perturb:it ions  arc  always incoherent.

Section 9.2:  Emission and  Absorption o   R‹idi‹nio»         353

The  term  in  curly  brackets  is  sharply  peaked  about  ‹z›9  (Figure  9.2),  whereas y  u› j  
is ordinarliy  quiie  oroad,  so we may  as weir  replace  y  u› j  by  p(      i,  and  taKe it  
outside  the  integral:

N₍    ₀₎                                                                 [9.40]

Chang•inp  variables  to  .        (in )  —  m)r/2,  extending  the  limits  of  integ•ration   to
.   =      on  (since  the  integrand  is essentially  zero  out  there  anyway),  and  looking
H]    I flL  US fi lJ ltd     lH tC@r‹l1



we  ftnd
[9.42]

This  time  the  transition  probability  is  proportional  to  r.  The  bizarre  “flopping" 
phenomenon  characteristlc  of  a  monochromatic   perturbation  gets  “washed  out” when  we hit 
the system  with ali ilicoherent  spread of frequencies.  In particular,  the transition rate (fi   
   dP/clt) is now  a ron.ii«nr:
'y‹uo).                                9.411
So  far,  we  have  assumed  that  the  perturbing  wave  is  coming  in  along  the  3 direction  
(Figure  9.3),  and  polarized  in  the      direction.  But  we  are  interested  in the  case  of 
 an  atom  bathed  in  radiation  coming  from  ri//  directions,  and  with  all possible 
polarizations: the energy  in the fields (p(in)) is shared equally  among  these differelit  modes. 
 What  we need,  in  place of |g |',  is the nverrige  of |y    ii|',   where


(generalizing  Equation  9.33), and  the average  is over all  polarizations  antl all inci- dent 
directions.
The  averaging•  can  be  carried  out  as  follows:  Choose  spherical  coordinates such  that  
the direction  of  propagation  (k) is a1ong• .r, the polarization  (fi) is along
c. and  the  vector      defines  the spherical  angles 8 and Q (Flgure  9.5).¹²(Actually,

'—1' 11  trc.tt  jc  ‹ts  though  it  we c  r‹•nl. e ven  though  in  general  it  will  be 
complex.  Since



Ave can etc  the \vI\cIc calculatitJn  lt›i  the real  t\tJd  in1a•inaiy  parls  scpar2fcly. and 
simply :\dd  tlic  results. In  Equati‹›n  9.47  ihc  ttb  ‹›Iutc  value  sign  is  d‹›ing  d‹›ubIc 
 dutv.  si  nit"ying  bcth  the  vector  magnitude
‹iii‹I  to  the cntJ\pIcx  amplitude:

354          Chapter  9    Tiiiie-Depeiidgtit  Perturh‹itioti Theory


















FIGURE 9.5:    Axes for the averaging of  J p   • â|2.

jz  in ,yxea  ncre,  unu  we re ‹averaging  over un  x  ‹inn ii  conslSteHt  W ltfl xiii — wnicn is 
to say, over all 8 and $.  But  it's really  the coordinate  system,  not the vector  y, that  is 
changing.) Then

and



4                3        q                                             f9.46]
COlicliisioy.! The transition  rate for stiiiiulated  emission  from state la to state  i,
unucr  Inc iniiuence  or incoherent,  unpoiarize‹i  iigni inciaein  irom air  directions,  is

[9.47]


wyhere       is the matrix  element  o1 the electric  dipole moment  between  the two states
(Equation  9.44),  and  p(      )  is  the  energy  density  in  the  fields,  per  unit  
frequency,
evaluated  at        =   (E , —  E,   )/Ii. I"

'"This  is a special  case o1’ Fermi‘s Golden  Rule lor time-depcndcnt  per tul'bation  theory.  
which
says thai  the li insitinn  ritc in  piopoi\ioi1al  ie thc squarc of  tlJc matrix clcmcil\  uf  
tlJc pcrturbing  potential
.tD/ {U  tlme  s\rcn   th  nl” tlJe |›crtri‹’h:itinn  at  thc  traiJsi\ion  lrcqucnc} .


Section  9.3:  Spoiitaiieous  Ettlission         US 5

9.3  SPONTANEOUS  EMISSION
9.3.1  Einstein's A and B Coefficients
Picture  a container of atoms,  Nq  of  them  in the  lower  state (J„   J, ancl  Np  of  them  in 
the upper state ( Ji,). Let  A  be  the  spontaneous  emission  rate,"  so that  the number of  
particles  leaving  the  upper  state  by  this  process,  per  unit  time.  is  Y,A.¹⁵  The 
transition  rate  for stimulated  emission,  as we have seen (Equation  9.47).  is propor- tional  
to  the energy  density  of  the electi‘Olnagnetic  field:  B;„ p(o    ):  the  ilUlnber  of 
particles  leaving  the  upper  state  by  this  mechanism,  per unit  tiNle,  is  N,  B „, p(«    
). The absorption  rate  is likewise  proportional  to p(m0)—call  it  B„ ,y(‹of);  the  num- ber 
of  particles  per  unit  time ,|oiniiiq  the  ripper  level  i.s  therefore  N„ B„ › p(‹ui  ).  
All
told,  then,
UN                                                                                       [9.48]
Suppose  these atoms are in thermal equilibriuln  with the ambient field, so that the  number‘ of  
particles  in each  level  is c-onstunt.  In  that case r/Nt,/‹/i      0,  and  it
follows  that                                                    A
’(‘*0         (N,!N,) B„ , —  B „,                                  f9.49j
On  the  other  hand,  we  know  trout  elementary  statistical   mechanics"   that  the number  of 
 partlcles  wlth  energy  E, in  thennal  equllibriuin  at  telnpcratiire  T.  is proportional  to 
the Boltzmann  factor, exp(— E/ 1'p T),   so




and  hence
N„      e  "  "’T
Nd,       e—E  !’^‘’

[9.50J


[9.5 I ]

But  Planck's  blackbody  fornuila  (Equation  5.113)  tells  us  the energy  density




COlnparinp  the  two expressions.  we conclude  that
[9.5.3j


'   Norni‹tll y  1’ d  use  A   1 C›r  .1  lrilRSltiOn   rglfC,  bHl  Otlf   of‘  delclc rice  to  
c/‹'i'   1/r‹'  everyone   fnllow.s
Einstein's  RUC.tfiOn  in  this  context.


*’Sce.  for  cx•ilnpIc.  Chtirlcs  Kittcl  and  Hci hei't  Kiucnlcr.  Tli‹n-iiinl  Alt\‘.‹i‹-«.  
2nd  cd.  (freeman.
New  York.  I U8(I), Cliaptcl  3.

and
A                                                                         [9.54]

Equation  9.53  confirms   what   we  already   knew:  The  transition   rate  for  stiniu-

in  1917—indeed,   Einstein  was  forced  to  “invent”  stimulated  emission  in  order to   
reproduce   Planck's   formula.   Our   present   attention,    however,    focuses   on Equation  
9.54,  for  this  tells us the  spontaneous  emission  rate (A)—which  is  what we are  looking  
for—in  tenns of  the  stimulated  emission  rate (B „,p(n›9))—which we  already  know.  Froln 
Equation  9.47  we read  off



and  it  follows  that  the  spontaneous  emission  rate  is


rn*<




Problem  9.8  As  a  mechanism  for  downward   transitions,   spontaneous  emission competes with 
therinally  stimulated emission (stimulated emission for which black- body  radiation  is the 
source).  Show  that  at room  temperature  (T  —— 300 K) thermal
Hi cc{uciiaic
einlssion  dominates  for  frequencies  well  above  5  x  10¹'  Hz.  WhlCh  niechanisiii dominates 
 for  visible  light’?

Problem  9.9  You could derive the spontaneous emission rate (Equation  9.56) with- out  tfie 
detour tfii‘ougfi Einstein  s  A and  ñ  coefficients  it you Knew  tfie p•round-state energy  
density  of  the  electromagnetic  field,  pt;(in),  for  then  it  would  simply  be  a case  of  
stilnulated  enission  (Equation  9.47).  To  do  this  honestly  would  require quant+Hn  
electrodynainics,  but  if  you  are prepared  to believe  that  the  ground  state consists  of  
one /›/ioroii  iii  erff/i iitode,  then  the derivation  is  very  simple:
(a)   Replace  Equation  5.111  by  N„          1;,  and  deduce      (in).  (Presumably   this 
formula breaks down at high frequency, elne the total “vacuum energy” would be  inquire ...    but  
that's  a story  for a different  day.)
(b)   Use your result. together with Equation  9.47, to obtain  the spontaneous  emis- sion  rate.  
Compare Equatlon  9.56.




9.3.2  The Lifetime  of an Excited State
Equation  9.56 is our fundamental  result; it gives the transition  rate for spontaneous emission. 
Suppose,  now, that  you  have somehow  pumped a large number of atoms

as  time  p•oes  on: soecificallY.  in  a  time  interval  Mr  You  will  lose  a  fraction  A  lt
of  them:


(assuming   there  is  liO  mechanism  to  replenish  the  supply).'⁷  Solving  for  Nz(t),
we  find:
[9.58J

cvidently  the  number  remaining  in  the excited  state  decreases  exponentially, with

[9.59]

We  call  this  the  lifetime  of  the  state—technically, it  is  the  time  it  takes  for  Nt(t)
to  reach  1/e      0.368  Of  its  inltial  value,
I   have  assumed   all   alonz   that   there   are  only   Evo   states   for  the  system, but   
this  was  just  for  notational   simplicity—the  spontaneous   emission   formula quat on         
   gives  t  e  translt  on  r  te   or                       re•       ess  o   w  at  ot  er 
states  may  be  accessible  (see Problem  9.15).  Typically,  an excited  atom  has many different 
 decay  modes (that  is:  /,   can decay  to a large number of different  lower- eiergy  states,   
f     ,  J„,,  Jq,, ...    ). In  that  case  the  transition  rates  add, nd   the  net
lifetime  is
[9.60)


Example 9.1    Suppose a charge q  is attached  to a spring and constrained  to oscil- by 
spontaneous  emission  to state  |n'). Froin  Equation  9.44 we  have

You  calcillated  the inatrlx  elements  of  x  back  in  Problem  .3,33:




' 7Tlii.s situation  i.s not  to  bc  ctinluscd  «'ith  the case of’ tliei mat  equilibrium.  which 
 we considered in  the  prex'ious  sectitin.  We  .resume  here  th‹it  the  attiiiis  h:rvc  bccn  
li fted  nut  nI’ equilibrium.  ‹ind  arc  in the  process  ol  ca.reading  back  dowit  to  thclr  
equilibrium  levels.


p                  e     eye    e  t   e           ion      eoi ›'

wherc  ‹o  is  the natural  frequency  of  the oscillator,  (I no  longer  need  this  letter  for 
the frequency  of  the stilnulatlng  radiailOlJ.)  But  we're  talking  about  eitiis.tion,  so ii’ 
must  be l‹›ivei   than  ii; for our purposes.  then,

[9.61)

Evidently  transitions  occur  only  to states  one  step  lnwer  on  the  “ladder,”  and  the 
frequency  of  the photon  emitted  is
(ii +  I /2)/l«› — (n' +  I /2)/:in

Not surprisingly,  the system radiate.s at the classical  oscillator frequency. The tran-


[9.63)

»nrI  the  1ifrtinae  nf*  the    it th  Atm innarv  Minh  in

[9.64]

Meanwhile,  each  radiated  phOton  carl les  ali  eliergy  /:in.  so  the  poH'er  radiated  is
Attn›:


or , since  t  e enerp•y  o

E  —                                              [9.65)

is is             r  g     ow     ra  1                q             o  c      or wl      ln        
ener•
For‘  coinnarison,  let's  deleriiiine  the  averil9e  powei   radiated  by  a  ‹ lii.s.7i 'fil 
oscillator  with the same energy. Accordinp•  to classical  electrodynamics. the power r     a e    
 y an   cc   era in   c    roe         « v  n   y    e    ar    o    o        a

9.66


. Averaein   over a  full  c  cfc  then

12   r

'   Sec.  Ill  example.  Gi’il”fitIJs  ( lontnotu   I IN).  Section   I  I .?.   I .




But  the enei ¿j  of  the oscillator  is  E      (1/2)iiim'.r0, so .r0   =  2£/iii‹u',  and  hence

[9.67]


ClaSSlCal  limit  (h         0)  the  classical  and  quantum  formulas  ap•ree; ˡ’  however, the 
qualitriin formula (Equation  9.65) protects the ground state: If  €  —  (1/2)/tm  the
oe



half  the  atoms  in  a  large  sample  to  lnake  a  transition.  Find  the  relation  between r  
/,  and  T  (the  *lifetime”  of  the  state).

s s sProblem 9.11  Calculate  the  lifetime  (in  set'oiids)  for  each  of  the  four  n   =   2
state.s  of  hydrop•en.  Hf/in   YoU’11  need  to  evaluate  matrix  elements  of  the  folvl

r sin B sin Q, and     =  i- cos 8. Most  of  these  lntegrals  are zero,  so scan  them  before 
yI3U      tart  ca         t    g        s i e                                econ        or  a    
except   4.00   W
is  infinite.


9.3.3  Selection  Rules
The  calculation   of‘  s  Olltaneous  einlssion   rates  has  been  reduced   to  a  matter  of

ego
ev   ua     g     a    x  e e   ent    o   t
n

(/¿,|r| f„).


right  now and do so!), these quantities ai‘e very often .err›. and  it would  be helpful IO  HOW  
111  advance  when  this  is  going  to  happen,  so  we  don't  waste  a  lot  of t  ne  e  a uat 
1 g    nne  essary   1  egra        uppose  we   re  in e este     n   y  te n       e

may specify  the states with the usual quantum  numbers ii. /, and iii, and  the inatrlx eleliients 
 nre


'"In  1'.ict.  il’ w'c  express  P  ill  tei‘nis  ol’ the  energy  ‹there tln•  gronit 1 state, the 
 two  l’t›rlnulas  arc i‹lentlc:il.


360          C/  apter  9     Tinid-Dependent  Peri/irf›otioii T/ gon

Clever exploitatlon  of  the angular  monielitum  commutation  relations  and  the  her- miticity 
of the angular momentum  operators yields a set of powerful COlistraints on this quantity.




with .v,  v, and  e, whlCh  we worked  out  in Chapter 4 (see Equation  4.122):


Front  the third  of  these  it follows  that

0 =   (ii’l'm   [L-.  e]|nfni)  =   (ii'l'iti'  (L - z. —  ML.-)  mhn)



Either ni’ =  ni.     or else                      ) =  0.

Meanwhile.  from  the commutator  of  L-  with x  we get




Conclusion:


[9.68)






[9.69]


So  you  never  have  to colnpute  matrix  elements  of  j'—you  can  always  get  them

Finally,  the  commutator  of  L-   with  y  yields


— (ill’ — ii1)h \ii’I’m'|;’|iiIm)     —ih(n I’iii’|. |i1liii).
Conclusion:

(/›t’ — lii)(ii  I'iii  |\’|iiIiri)  ——  — i (/z’/’us’|.i |/1Iiii).

In particular, coinbininp•  Equations 9.70 and  9.71,
[9.71]



and  hence:

Either  (ni’ — m)'  — 1,     or else \ii’l’m  \x  iiliti)  —— (n’I'm'  v mhm 1  =   0.     [9.72]


Sectioti  9.3:  S poiituneous Emission         361
Front  Equations  9.69 and  9.72  we obtain  the selection  rule for ix:
No transitions  occur unless  Am  =  1.1 or 0.                     [9.7.1]
This  is  an easy  result  to  understand,  if  you  remember  that  the  photon  carries  spin 1,  
and  hence  its  value of in  is  l,  0, or — 1 ;     consel vation of (the z colnponent  of) 
angular niomentuin requires  thai  the atom give up whatever  the photon takes  away.
Selection  rules  involving  I  and  /“.   In Problem  9.12  you  are  asked  to derive the  
following  commutation  relation:
2h'(cL                                              [9.74]

As  before,  we sandwich  this commutator  between  (n’/’ni’|  and  |n/@  to derive  the selection  
nile:
(ii'l’iti’  [L'-. [L², r]] ii lm   —— 2/i'(n'/'ni' |(rL' + L‘r) |n/iB)
=   2/i  [/(/  +   l)  +   1’(1'  +    l)](ii'/'in'|r|n/in}  =    ii'l  iti'  (L‘[L‘. r] —   L². r  
L-    ii liii
h‘[1’{1’ +  1) — /(/ +  I ))(ii’l’iti    L!. r]|ii/iii)
=   /i  [/'(/' +   l ) —  I(1 +   l)]{n'fix'|(L‘r —  z L-)   ii lm)



Conclusion:



But


and
=  /l  [/'(/' -1-  l)   — 1(1 -1-  l)]‘(n'/'ni’|r|ii f@.


Either  2[/(/ +  1) +  1'(1'  —F l)]     [I’(I' -1- 1)  —   (/ -1- 1)]'
or else    \ii'l'iti'|r|n/iii )  =   0.
[9.75)



[9.76]




so the first  condition  in  Equation  9.76 can  be written  ill  the lonii
[(/' +   / +    l)‘     —  1][(/’  —  f)² —  l]   =   0.


[9.77]

-'When  the poliir uxis is along  tnc directiini  ol‘ propagatiiin.  the middle  value docs  hot  
occur. and if  you  are  only  interested  lR  the  itiiiiil)ei-  iJf  linearly  independent  
photon  stfitcs,  llic  iinswcr  is 2.  not  3. However.  in  this case  the  photon  need  ntit  
be going  in  tne  -  direction.  alid  all     UC  \'.llUCS  ‹me  possible.


Une    e        e       e               i›eoi)         on

/=0         / = 1                       /  = 2















The  first  tactor  ccauiot  be  zero  (unless  /'  =  /  =   0—this  loophole  is  closed  in

tion  rule for /:
No  transitions  occur  unless  A/ =      1.                        [9.781   

an        s  resu        oug     ar   ro        va     o    e    e   is  easy  to      e     e      
  e photon carries spin 1, so the rules for addition  of angular  momentum  would  allow
/' =    -I-  1,  /'  — 1,  or  /’  =   /  — 1  (for  electric  dipole  radiation  the  middle  
possi- bility—though  permitted  by conservation of angular momentum—does  not  occur).
Evidently  not all transitions to lower-energy  states can proceed by .spontaneous tions for the 
first four Bohr levels in hydrogen is shown in Figure 9.6. Note that the
2S  state (ts00) is “stuCk”:  It cannot  decay, because  there is no lower-energy  state

than that of, for example,  the 2 P  states (J•   i.  €210. and  J:1-1) Metastable states do 
eventually  decay. by collisions,  or by what  are (misleadingly) called forbidden


sProblem 9.12  Prove the commutation  relation  in Equation  9.74. min.  First show at
[L°,Z] = 2fñ(a’L¿ - i*L, - tñz).

Use  this, and  the fact  that -r
L = -r
(r x p) =  0, to demonstrate  that


The generalization from e  to r is trivial.







then  (i                   )=0.

sProblem 9.14  An  electron  ln  the n  =  .3,  /  =   0, ni      0 state  of  hydrogen  decays by  
a sequence  of  (electric  dipole)  transitions  to the ground  state.
(a)   What  decay  routes  are open  to it? Specify  them  ln  the  following  way:
|300)  —+   nliti)  —+   ii'I'iti'!-  —+        —+  |100).
(b)   If  you  had  a  bottle  full  of  atoms  in  this  state,  what  fraction  of  them  would 
decay  via each  route?
(c)   What  is  the  lifetime  of  this  state?   ffiii/:  Once  it's  made  the  first  
transition,

sts  no   ongaer   n  t  e

open,  the  transition  rates  add.
so  onty  t  e    r  t    tep   n  eac      e  uence   s





s sProblem 9.15  Develop  time-dependent  pemirbation  theory  for  a  inultilevel  sys-



At  time  i =  0 we  turn on a perturbation  H'(i),  so that  the  total  Hanultonian  is
[9.80]

(a)   Generalize  Equation  9.6 to read




[9.82]

where


(b)   If  the system starts  out  in  the state  Jp,    show  that  (in  first-order  perturbation
theory)


p                  me     epe     e        e                           eor y


and


or examp        uppose        is cons          excep               was


[9.85)
and switched off again at some later time r). Find the prnbability  of  transition from  state  N  
to state  M  (M  /  N). as  a  function  of  i.  Answer .
,  sin'[(F/V—  E p;)t/2Ii

(d)   Now  suppose  If'   is  a  sinusoidal  function  of  time:  N'   =   V cos(u›t).  Making

Ez  ——  EN :i: liu›, and  the  transition  probability  is
sin-    E    —  E         liu›  1  2/:

N —• M  —       M N
(EN     E p;      liu›)-’
(e)   Suppose  a iuultilevel  system  is immersed  in incoherent  electromagnetic radi- a  o        
sing    ec   on            as  a •      e   s  o        at     e  tran   t on rate   or   ti

level  system.

Problem 9.16  For  the  examples  in  Problem  9.15(c)  and  (d),  calculate  r„,(i),  to first  
ordcr.  Check  the  normalization  condition:
[9.88]


in  the  ori•i                        .  woiil             do  better  to  use



square  well.  Now   the  “floor”  of”  the  well  rises  temporarily  (maybe  water  leaks in,  
and  then  drains  out  again),  so  that   the  potential  inside  is  uniform  but   time

(a)   Solve  for  the  e.vnct   c„, (i),  using  Equation  9.82,  and  show   that   the  wave 
function  changes   ›luise,  but  no  transitions  occur.  Find  the  phase  change,
‹f(T),  in  tenns of  the function  Yb(/).
(b)   Analyze  the  same  problem  in  first-order  perturbation   theory,  and  compare

Comment:   The  same  result  holds  ivlieiiei›ei    the  perturbation  siiiiply  adds  a constant  
(constant  in .  .  that  is, not  in  i) to  the  potential:  it  has nothing  to do  with the  
infinite  square  well,  as such.  Compare Problem  1.8.






sProblern  f.18  A  particle  of  mass  m  is  initially  in  the  ground  state  of  the  (one- 
dimensional)  infinite  square  well.  At  time r      0 a “brick” is dropped  into  the  well, so  
that  the potential  becomes



F()= 0,

herwise.

where   In  C    E i .  After  a  time  T,   the  brick  is  removed,  and  the  enery•y   of  the 
particle  is  measured.  Find  the  probability  (in  first-order  perturbation   theory)  that
e resu    is now


and spontaneous emission. How coine there is no such thing as spontaneous absoip-


*        ro   e                 agnet         onan  e    A   pi          part c e    it   gyron 
agnet c rat o
y,  at  rest  in  a  static  magnetic  field  B  k,  precesses  at  the  Landor  frequency  m9  — Y 
B    (Example  4.3).  Now  we  turn  on  a  small  transverse  radiofrequency  (rf)  field, 
BrlPCOS(£tli) i  — sin(mi)  J), so  that  the  total  field  is


B =  B, cos(mi) i“ —  Bt  sin(mi) |  +  Bq k.


(b)   If  x (') =                 is  the  spin  state  at  time r, show  that


where  f2        Brf  S ielated  to  the strength  of  the  rf  field.
[9.89]





(9.90]
(cl   Check  thai  the  q•enera1  solution  for  ri(i)  and  I›(i),  in  terms  of  their  iIlltial 
values ftp  and  /›b, is





COS

where



own
p  e              i    e     epe     e        e  t
Beni  y

(d)  If   the  particle   starts  out   with  spilt   u    (i.e.,  rig   =     1,   6b   =    0),  
find   the probability   of  a  transition   to  spin  down,   as  a  function  of  time.   An.ii 
ver.

e resonance  curve,

9.92

as a function  of  the driving  frequency  in (for  fixed  mb  and  f2).  Note  that  the

(f)   Since n›9 =   y B), we can use the experimentally observed  resonance  to deter- mine  the 
magnetic dipole moment  of the particle.  In a nuclear  magnetic  res- onance (rna) experiment  the 
 y-factor  of  the proton  is  to be measured,  usinp•

will  the  resonant  frequency  be?  (See  Section  6.5  for  the  inap•netic  moment of  the  
proton.)  Find  the  width  of  the  resonance  curve.  (Give  your  answers in


to  the  wavelength  of  light)  that  spatial  variations  in  the  field  can  be  ignored.  The 
fr ife  electric  field  would  be
E(r. i)      E9 cos(k   r — mr).                                      (9.93)
If  the  atom  1s  centered  at  the  origin,  then  k   r         1   over  the  relevant   volume 
(|k|  =   2s/X,  so  k   r       r/Z  «    I),  and  that's  why  we  could  afford  to  drop  this 
tein.  Suppose  we keep  the first-order  correction:

E(r, /) =   Eb[cos(mi)- +  (k   r) sin(mi)].                            [9.94]

The first  term  gives  rise  to  the  allowed (electric  dipole)  transitions  we considered in  
the  text;  the secolid  leads  to so-called  forbidden  (magnetic  dipole  and electric
quadrupole)   transitions  (higher  powers-  of  k   r  lead  to  even  more  “forbidden”
transitions,  associated  with  hi%her  niultipole  moments)."

to  average  over  polarization  and  propagation  directions,  though  this  should really  be 
done  to complete  the calculation).  Attswet.

[9.95)



k  the Qiuuitimt  Tltet›r5. 3rd  ed. (McGi'aw-1-lill,  New  York.  1992).  Chapter  11.






level  ii   to  level  ii  —  2.  and   the   transition   rate  (suitably   averaged   over  fi
and  k)  is
[9.96]

(Note:  Here  ‹u  is  the  frequency  of  the  /›/io/on.  not  the  oscillator.)  Find  the ratio  
of  the  “forbidden”  rate  to  the  “allowed”  rate,  and  comment  on  the terminology.
(c)   Show  that   the  25  —+   I S  transition  in  hydrogen  is  not  possible  even  by  a

as well: the dominant  decay is in fact by two-photon emission, and the lifetiiiie is about  a  
tenth of  a second.    )

s  s  sProblem 9.22  Show  that the spontaneous emission rate (Equatioli  9.56) for a tran- sition  
from  ii. l  to ii', /' in hydrogen  is






where


21 — 1
.97]



[9.98)


consistent  with the sclectiOli  rules: iii’ =  ni -1- 1. iii. or iu — 1. Notice that the answer 1s 
independent  of ni.) Hinl:  First calculate all  the nonzero matrix  elements of x,  i’,

the   uantit










'   Sec Mas‹it‹ik‹i  MizusI1in1a.   fiii‹iiitmn  4f‹•‹Ii‹i/ti‹.« ‹›(Ji‹›iiii‹  S|›ecii’‹i 
‹nl‹I/\/‹›mtc  Siriir,liir‹’. Ben-
jamin.  New  Yni•k  ‹ 1970).  Section  fi.6.












CHAPTER  10

THE ADIABATIC APPROXIMATION




10.1  THE ADIABATIC THEOREM                                                                         
                        

10.1.1   Adiabattc Processes

Imagine  a perfect  pendulum,  with no  friction  or air resistance,  oscillating  back  and forth  
in  a  vertical  plane.  If you  grab  the  support  and  shake  it  in a jerky  nialiner  the bob  
will  swing  around  chaotically.  But  if  you  ther;  peittl y uwd  .stendil;   move  the support 
 (Figure  10.1),  the  pendululn  will  continue  to swing  in  a nice  smooth  way, in  the  same  
plane  (or  one  parallel  to  it),  with  the  same  amplitude.  This  ,qi adiial cli itige of the 
e.vtei ii  if chem:fittest.‹  defines an adiabatic process. Notice  thai  there are two  
characteristic  times  involved:  T;,  the  “internal”  time,  representing  the  motion of the  
system  itself (in  this case  the period of  the pendulum’s  oscillations), and  T,., the 
“external”  tiliie. over which the parameters of the system change appreciably  (if the pendulum  
were  mounted  on a vibratllig  platform,  for example,  T,. would be  the period  of  the yet  
if,/"r rrri '.i  motion).  An  adiabatic  process  is one  for  wliiCh  Thy        Ti-'
The  basic  strategy   for  analyzing   an  adiabatic   process  is  first   to  solve   the
problem  with  the  external  parameters  held  c   nsioiii,  and  only  at  the  cmd  of  the 
calculation  allow  thein to vary (slowly)  with time. For example,  the etas.sical period of  a  
pendulum  of  (fixed)  length  L   is  2s     L         if  the  length  is  now  gradually rJi 
iii,gin,g,   the  period   will   presumably   be  2s  Let)/ .  A   more  subtle  example occurred  
in  our  discussion  ot  the  hydrogen  molecule  ion  (Section  7.3).  We  begali

’ Fui'  an  interesting   cIiscu.ssion   nt"  classical   actiahytic   pr‹›ccsscs.  scc  Frank   S. 
  Ct-.\wl”crd.  Jul.  /.
Phd   .  SS, 137  ( 1990).


Sectioti  1.0. 1:  The  Adiabatic  Theorem          369














transported very gradually, the pendulum inside keeps
swinging  wit        e same amp itu   e, in a p ane para


for  the  motion  of  the  electron.  Once  we  had  found  the  •qround  state  enerp•y  of the  
system  as  a  function  of  fi,   we  located  the  equilibrium  separation  and  from the  
curvature  of  the  graph  we  obtained  the  frequency  of  vibration  of  the  nuclei (Prnhlem  
7.1 (I)   In  iaanlernlar  physics  this  terhnin,iie  (heginning  with  nuclei  at  rest 
calculating  electronic  wave  functions,  and  using  these  to obtain  information  about the  
positions  and—relatively  sluggish—motion  of  the  nuclei)  is  known  as  the

In quantum  mechanics,  the essential content of  the adiabatic  approximation
can  be cast in the form ot’ a theorem. Suppose  they Hamiltonian  changes  gradiia//y

that  if  the  particle  was  initially  in  the  nth  eigenstate  of  If'.  it  will  be  carried 
(under the Schriidinger equation)  into the nth eigenstate of  H ’. (I assume that the spectrum  is 
discrete  and  nondegenerate  throughout  the  transition  from  H'  to  H ’,

relaxed,  given  a  suitable  procedure  for  “tracking”  the  eigenfunctions,  brit  I'm  not 
going  to  pursue  that  here.)
For example,  suppose  we prepare  a particle  in the  ground  state  of  the infinite square  well 
(Figure  10.2(a)):

2 sin                                                        [10.1]
If  we now  gradually  move  the right  wall out  to 2ri,  the adiabatic  theorem says that the  
particle  will  end  up in  the  ground  state  of  the expanded  well (Figure  10.2(b)):

1
—      — sin (2«                                         [10.2]


oe                   epc            ox                                     ts











FIGURE 10.2:     (a) Particle starts out in the ground state of the infinite square well. (b)
If  the wall moves slowly,  the particle remains in the ground  state. (c) If  thc wall  moves
oppy,    nepa    ic     is         t                ey)         s   ni   a   s      e           n


(nnsrl    nr•rhnn«    frnm   n  nhn    /    fnrtnr)    Nnf ir'e  I hnf   wr‘’ r/    tlnf   tn I 
Liny   mhm if   n   t/oxf//
change  in  the  Hamiltonian  (as  in  perturbation  theory)—this  one  is  liurge.  All  we 
require  is  that  it  happen  slot i•l5. Energy  is not  conserved  here:  Whoever  is moving the  
wall  is  extracting   energy   front   the  system,  just  like  the  piston  on  a  slowly 
expanding  cylinder  of gas.  By  contrast,  if  the  well expands  siicldeiil y, the resulting 
state  is  still  /'  (.  )  (Figure  10.2(c)),  which  is  a  complicated  linear  combination  of 
eigenstates of the new  Hamiltonian  IProblem  2.3S). In this case energy  i.v  conserved fat  
least,  its e.vt›ectciiioti  v‹i/tie  is); as in  the   i’cr• expansion  of a p•as  finto a vacuum) 
when  the  barrier  is suddenly  removed,  no  work  is done.


s    sProblem 10.1  The case  of  an  inhnite .s0uarc  well  whose  right  wall  expands  at  a
coiist‹iiit  velocity  (r)  can  be solved  e.vactl› .-  A complete  set of  solutions is


[10.3]

where   w(r)                       is   the   (instantaneous)   width   of   the   well   and  „E

solution  is a linear combination  of  the  &’s:

No.^j


the coetficients  c„  are  incIc• ›eitdent  o[  t.

(a)   Check  that  Equation  10.3  satisfies  the  tiiTle-dependent  Schrfidinger  equation,
with  the  appropriate  boundary  conditions.

-S.   W.  Doeschcr  and  M.  H. Rice. At».  J.  Ph j's. 37,  I 2J6 ( 1'36*9).


Section 1.0.1.  The  Adinbatic Tfieore»r         371

(b)   Suppose  a particle  starts  out (I =  0) in  the  ground  state of  the  initial  well:



Show  that  the expansion  coefficients  can  be written  in  the form

[10.5]

where e      ni on/2v'/i  is a  dimensionless  measure of  the speed  with  which the  well  
expands.  (Unfortunately,  this  integral  cannot  be evaluated  in  terms of elementary  
functions.)

“external”  time is p•iven  by  ir(T,.)  — 2s. The “inteival”  time is the period  of the 
time-dependent exponential  factor  in the (initial) ground  state. Determine T   and  T;,  and  
,show  that  the  adiabatic  regime  corresponds  to a  55.1, so that exp(—i‹r‹-)  =   1   over  
the  domain  of  integration.  Use  this  to  detemiine  the expansion coefficients,  r„.  
Construct  T(.r. r), and confinn that  it  is consistent with  the adiabatic  theorem.
(d)   Show  that  the phase factor  in  T(. . i) can  be written  in the form


0(/)  —  ——        E  (t  ) ‹li  .
*›    t›
[10.6]
where  6„ (i)       x's'/i'/2iii in' is  the  inst mtaiieoiis  eigenvalue,  at  time  i. Comment  
on  this result.


10,1.2  Proof of the Adiabatic Theorem
The adiabatic  theorem  is simple  to state,  and it  s‹›tmds  plausible,  but  it  is not  easy to 
 prove."  If  the  Hamiltonian  is  iiide;›encletit  of  time,  then  a  particle  which  starts 
nrit  in  the  xth  eigeiixtate,      r„

[10.7]

'The thctuein is usu:illy attributed  to Ehrcnfcst,  who studied a‹1iahatic pr‹iec.sses in car ly 
versions U    (UC  t]Hilf1fHlT1   lhCt›ry.  The  fir.st  proof’  in  modern  quantum  mechanics   
was  given  by  Beni  and  Fock, Zrii.  J: Plt› ark  51.  165.1.1 °328 J. Other pl oofs  will  be  
tound  in Messiah.  Q_ii‹to/nnt  /lfrc/iriiiic.i. Wiley. New yotp  ( } 962 j.  Vol.  l I.  Chapter- 
 XVII.  Section  1.2.  J-T  Hwang  and  Philip  Pcchuk•is.  J.  B6rni.  Plt5‘s.  67. 464lL  1')77. 
and  Gasitirtiw icz. Qnniifiiiii  Pln si‹,‹. Wiley.  New  Ycark  (1974).  Chattel‘ 22. Prtihlcm  
f›. The
¿t op jjppl  pjvcn  hci-e  tiillows  B. H.  Bransden  ;ind  C. J. Joachain.  fii/ror/nt’/i   ii  ta 
 Qtutittimt  Ne‹‘fi‹iiii‹’.v.
hurl  rrl    Arlrlisiin-Weslr•y   B‹iston.  MA  I R   II(1). Section  9.J.
I’11 suppress  the dependence  on  position  for spin. etc.):  in  this argument  only  the  time  
depen- dence  is at  issue.


372          Chapter 1.0    The  Adiahntic Approximation

remains  in  the with eigenstate,  simply  picking  up a phase factor:


If the Hamiltonian  changes  with time. then the eigenfunctions and eigenvalues are



H(i)      (/)      E„(r){/„(/),

but  they .still  constitute (at any  particular  instant)  an orthononnal  set
[10.9]



and  they are complete,  so the general  solution  to the time-dependent Schrodinger



can  be expressed  as a linear combination  of  them:

[10.12]


where


Egg(t’) dt'


[10.1.3)

generalizes  the  “standard”  phase  factor  to  the  case  where  £„  varies  with  time. (As  
usual, I could  have included  it  in  the coefficient  c„(r),  but  it  is convenient  to factor 
out  this portion  of  the time dependence,  since it  would  be present  even  tor a  time-in 
dependent  Hamiltonian.)
Substitutinp•  Equation  10.12  into Equation  10.11  we obtain




the last  two terNls cancel, leaving



Taking  the inner  product  with  /„„   and  invokinp•  the orthonorinality of  the instan- taneous 
eigenfunctions (Equation  10.10),




or



Now, differentiating Equation  10.9  with  respect  to time yields








Exploiting  the hermiticity  of  H  to write  (J„, |H|J„)   — „E    „f
[10.17]
pf   ), it follows  that



u  i  g     is  i   O           lO i               n             i  •     e          e              
e  energ e      e nondep•enerate) we conclude  that




This  result is e. ac't. Now comes  the adiabatic  approximation: Assume that  H



with  the solution where'

0
[10.20]

[10.21]


[10.22]
Tn   narticti1ar,   if  the   particle  starts  nut  in   the  nth  eigenstate   (which   is  tn  
say,  if
c„(0)      1, and  c„,(0)  — 0 foi  ill      li),  then  (Equation  10.12)

10.23]


a couple of  phase factors.    QED


Sec  A. C               Pinto ‹•/   i/.. ztrii. J.           6tl.

c  tlzc  nui‘malizaticn  ot"  /„,    entails  (‹//‹/r)(k„, l/„i)  -   (/„, |6„i)  +






xa   p e                   agine        electron  (ch   ge     e    na  s      )  at  re  t  at  
the  o ig n in  the  presence  of  a magnetic  field  whose  magnitude  (Be) is  constant,  but  
whose direction  sweeps  out  a  cone,  of  opening  angle  o,   at  constant  angulai   velocity  
in (Figure  10.3):

B(i) =  By[sin a cos(mr)i +  sin o  sin(c›r) / -1- cos ekJ.               [10.24J


e
—B





here






and
sin a        — cos a





cos(o/2)
e“°'  sin(a/2)


— cos(a/2)



[10.26J



[10.27]

they  represent  spin  up and  spin  down,  respectlvely,  ‹tlon,q tlte iiistniitniieous direc- 
tion‹¿/B(r) (see Piobleiii  4.30).  The corresponding  eigenvalues  are











FIGURE 10.3:    Magnetic   field   sweeps   around   in   a




Suppose  the  electron  starts  out  with  spin  up,  along  B(0):⁷
cos(a/2) sin(a/2)
The exact solution  to the  time-dependent Schriidinger  equation  is (Problem  10.2):






where

sin(Xr/2)   sin(o/2)e   ‘“""
[10.31]



[10.32]

Or, expressing  it  as  a linear combination  of  2p  and  2s:

(W  - WCOSD) sin               e  '   ''‘z+(t)
2

[10.33]

Evidently  the  (exact)  probability  of  a  transition  to  spin  down  (along  the  current 
direction  of B) is



The adiabatic  theorem says that  this transition probability  should  vanish in the limit
I    'I         T;, where T,. is the characteristic time for changes  in the Hamiltonian  (in  this

case,  li/(E f- —  Ex)  =  !/   1).  Thus  the  adiabatic  approximation   means  ci  ññ  in  : The 
 field  rotates  slowly,  in  comparison  with  the  phase  of  the  (unperturbed)  wave


sin n sin    2     )      —› 0.                [10.35] as  a    e    se          e     agnet c    e 
     ea  s  t  e e ectro    aroun      y    s  nose   w       t  e the system  bounces  back  and 
forth  between  spin  up and spin  down (Figure  10.4).


77lzis  is csscnlially  tlic  san c  as  Pruhlcni  9.20.  cxccpt  ih‹tl  nuy   tlme clccfzun  
.st‹irls  ‹iut  with  .spin

air
up      ng       w    r  as   n    q
u             p n  u}       ng


3.76         Ch‹ipter 1.0    The  Adi‹ih itic A ppi oximation



















4z

FIGURE 10.4:    Plot of the transition probability, Equation 10.34, in the ›ioiradiabatic



s sProblern 10.2  Check that Equation  10.31 satisfies the time-dependent Schrodinger







10.2.1  Nonholonomic Processes

of an adiabatic  process:  a perfectly  frictionless  peliduluin,  whose support  is carried around 
 froln  place  to place.  I  clalined  that  as  long  as  the  motion  of  the  support  is
›!ei ›  slow!, compared  to the period  of  the pendulum (so that  the pendulum executes
nlntlv   n<r‘i11ntimn <   hr•fmn•   thr•  srinnmrt   hn<  i11mvr•rl   nnnir•r‘inh1v1   it   will   
onntinri/    rn
swing  in  the  saIne  plane  (or  one  parallel  to  it),  with  the  same  aiiiplitude  (and,  of 
course,  the  saine  frequency).
But  what  if I  took  this ideal  pendulum  up to the North  Pole,  and  set  it  swinp•- ing—say, 
 in  the  direction  of  Portland  (Figure  10.5).  For  the  moment.  pi‘etend  the earth  is  not 
 rotating.  Very  gently  (that  i.s,  nâial›citicnlly),  I  carry  it  down  the  lon-

north-south.  NOw I caiTy  it (still swinp•ing  north-south)  part  way around  the equa- tor.  And 
finally, 1 take  it  back  up to the  North  Pole, along  the new  longitude  line.


Seciio›i  I 0.2:  Berry's Phase        3 77
Pendulum





Portland


Equator

FIGURE 10,5:    Itinerary for adiabatic transport of a pendulum on the surface of the earth.



was  when  I  set  out—indeed,  the  new  plane  makes  an  angle  O   with  the  old  one, where  
fi   is  the angle  between  the  southbound  and  the  northbound  longitude  lines. As it 
happens,  O  is equal  to the solid ciii,qle  (II) subtended (at  the center of the earth)  by  the 
 path  around  which I  carried  the  pendulum.  For  this  path  surrounds  a fraction  O/2s of 
the northern  hemisphere,  so its area is  A      (1/2)(O /2u)4u fi-  =
wnere

O =  A/ R'       R.                                          [10.36)
This  is  a  particularly  nice  way  to  expres.s  the  answer,  because  it  turns  out  to  be 
independent  of  the  slu:que  of  the  path (Figure  10.b).'
Incidentally,  the  Foucault  pendulum  is  an  example  of  precisely  this  sort  of adiabatic  
transport  around  a closed  loop on  a sphere—only  this time instead of me









FIGURE 10.6:    Arbitrary  path  on  the surface  of  a sphere,  subtending  n solid angle f2.

"You  can  prove  this  for  yourselt’.  ii’ you  are  interested.  Think  of  the circuit  as  
being  made up of’ tiny  segments  cal’  grcut  circles  (   codcsic.s  on  the  sphere):  the  
pendulum  makes  a  fixed  angle  with  cach gcodcsic  scglnciit,  so the  net  angular deviation  
i.s  iclated  to the sum ot’ the  vertex  ‹tnplcs of the spherical















GURE 10        Paths of  a  Foucault  pendulum,  in


carrying  the pendulum  around, I let  the i‘orch’on  of the earth  do the job. The solid angle 
subtended  by a latitude  line 80  (Figure  10.7) is



TZ r•1 sf    vr•   In    fhr•   r•srfh   /whi r‘h   h s6   mr•sno/h i1r•   frIrnr•rJ   fhrnrl th    
on   sn ol r•   nf      ?v     \     fhr•
daily  precession  of  the Foucault  pendulum  is 2s  CoS ^0 —a result  that  is ordinarily 
obtained  by  appeal  to Coriolis  forces  in  the rotating  reference frame,   but  is seen

A system such as this,  which  does not return  to its original state when  trans- ported  around  
a  closed  loop,  is  said  to  be  nonholonomic.   (The  “transport”  in
c{ucsiiuii   iiccu   iiui   mvui ve   ylys  sai  r//uz ‹c/i/ .     W iiai   we   iiavc   lii   
iutiiu   is   iiiai   iiic
naranieters  of the system  are chanced  in some fashion  that eventuallv  returns  them to  their  
initial  values.) Nonholonoiric  systems  are  ubiquitous—in  a sense,  every cyclical  engine  is  
a  nonnoionomic  device:  at   tfie  end  or  eacfi  cycie  tne  car  nas

has  even  been  applied  to  the  locomotion  of  microbes  in  fluids  at  low  Reynolds number. 
ⁱ'  My  project  for  the  next  section  is  to  study  the  qilnnttitn  meclinmt's oJ




'See.  l'or  example.  Jerry  B.  Marion  and  Stephen  T.  Thornton,  Ckissicnl  D5’tiniitics  of  
Particle.‹

(Z)  up  front  the  equator.  i-aiher  than  down  front  the  pole.  so cos d0 =   sin Z.
i ne  pendulum  example  is  an  application  ol  Hannay's  angie,  wliicn  is  tne classical  
an‹iiog  to Berly's  phase.  For a collection  oi‘ papers on  both  Subjects.  see  Alfred  Shapere 
and Frank  Wilcock. eds., Gvnitiett i‹- Pluisvs  iti  Physics.  Worl‹1  Scieniihc.  Singapore  
(1989).


Section  1.0.2:   Bert  y's Phase          3.79
10.2.2  Geometric P  ase
In  Section  10.1.2  I  showed   that   a  particle   which  stabs  out   ill  the  with   eigen- 
state  of  if(0)  remains,  under  adiabatic  conditions,  in  the  nth  eigenstate  of  H(i), 
picking  up  only  a  time-dependent  phase  factor.  Specifically,  its  wave  function  is 
(Equation  10.23)
[10.38d
where
[10.39)

is  the  dynamic  phase  (generalizing   the  usual  factor  exp(—i E„i//i)   to  the  case


¿,()  i   p„(/)  ,#„( ) ñ’         10.40J

is the  so—called  geometric  phase.
Now  /„  (r) depends  on  i  because  there  is some parameter  R(t)  in  the  Hamil- tonian  that  
is  changing   with  time.  (In  Problem  10.1,  fi(i)  would  be  the  width  of the expanding  
square  well.) Thus


3/„          3/„‹IR
3/          8A    /r

[10.41]


5O


J0     I
**“
**“

[10.42]

where   /t;  and   fi ¿   are  the  initial   and  final   values  of  R(t).  In  particular,  if  
the Hamiltonian  returns  to  its  original  form  after  time  T,    so  that   ft ¿   =    fti,  
then p,  (T)   =   0—nothinp•  very  interesting   flier e !
However,  1  assumed  (in  Eqrlation  10.41)  that  there  is only  cue  paralneter  in the 
Hamiltonian  that  is changing.  Suppose  there  are  N  of  them:  81 (i),    s(›).
RN it): in  that  case


‹/R
dt  “

[10.431

where R       (fi  . fi...  .     .    N), and  fip  is the gradient  with respect  to these 
parain-

R
[10.44]

380            Chapter  10     The  Adiabatic  Approximution

and if the Hamiltonian  returns to its original  fonn after a time T,  the net geometric
phase change  is

[10.45]


This  is  a  liii‹•  integral  around  a  closed  loop  in  parameter-space,  and  it  is  rent,  
in
general, zero. Equation  10.45  was fii'st obtained  by Michael  Berry,  in  1984,' ¹  and
„(T)  is called  Berry's  phase.  Notice  that„    (T)   depends  only' O/f  the  path tnkeii, not 
on  how y‹!si  that  path  is traversed  (provided,  of  course,  that  it  is slow  enough to 
validate the adiabatic  hypothesls).  By contrast,  the accumulated  d;iiantic  phase,


8„ (T)      —

depends  critically  on  the elapsed  time.
6„ (i') dt’.
0
We  are  accustomed  to  thinking  that  the  phase  of  the  wave  function  is  arbi- 
trary—physical quantities  involve  |T |',  and  the  phase  factor  cancels  out.  For  this 
reason,  most  people  assumed  until  recently   that  the  geometric  phase  was  o1  no 
conceivable  physical  significance—after  all,  the  phase  of  /„ (i)  itself  is ai bitrary. It  
was  Berry's   insight   that  if  you  carry   the  Hamiltonian  around   a  closed  loop. 
bringlng  it  back  to  its  oi'iginal   form,  the  relative  phase  at  the  beginning  and  the 
end  of  the  process  is not  arbitrary,  and  can  actually  be  measured.
For  examnle.  suonose  we  take  a  beam  of  narticles  (all  in  the  state  T).   and split  it 
in two, so that one beam passes through  an adiabatically  changing  potential, wniie  ifie  oifier 
 cioes  not.   w fien  ifie  two  i›eanis  are  recominneci,   tne  toiai  wave
function  has  the  form

1          l
2   0  +    2
[10.46j

where  Tq  is  the  “direct”  beam  wave  function,  and  r   is  the  e. ti a  phase  (in  part


In  this case


l

'i  Tr i*/ i 4   co   r›  =  mm'  cn  2
z





M0.471

So  by  looking  for  points  of  COllstructive  and  destructive  interference  (where  P  is
‹iii  cvcii or  uuu  niuiiipic  ui   i , i cspcc vi very j, uiic c‹in  c‹isiiy  nlcasui c  i  . 
(cci i y, ‹inn

' ' M.  V.  Berry.  Proc.  R.  Soc.  L‹›tid.  A  392.  45  ( 1984).  rcprinted  in  Wilczek  and  
Shapere  (foot-
note  10).  It  is  astonishing.  in  retrospect.  that  this  re.suit  escaped  notice  for  sixly 
 years.


Section I 0.2:  Berry’s  P/ ‹i6e         381
da






surface S bounded  by the closed  curve C.

other early  writers,  worried  that  the geometric  phase might  be swamped  by a larger dynamic  
phase,  but  it  has  proved  possible  to  arrange  things  so  as  to  separate  out the  two 
contributions.)
When  the  parameter  space  is  three  dimensional,  R  =  (   1 .  R›,     ft3). Berry's fonnula  
(Equation  10.45)  is  reminiscent   of  the  expression   for  magnetic  flux  in tenns  of  the  
vector  potential  A.  The  flux,  &,  through  a  surface  S  bounded  by  a curve           igure 
          ,  is
B - da.                                           10.48]

If  we  wrlte  the  magnetlc  fielil  in  terms of  the  vector  potential  (B =  V  x A). and 
apply  Stokes'  theorem:


6             (9    x  A)-    ma             A   cm.
S                                      C

Thus Berry's  phase  can  be  thought  of  as  the  “fiux”  of  a “magnetic  field”
[10.49)



[10.50]

through  the  (closed  loop)  trajectory   in  parameter-space.  To  put  it  the  other  way 
around,  in  the  three-dimensional  case  Berry's  phase  can  be  written  as  a  surface 
integral,
[10.51]

The   magnetic    analogy   can   be   carried   much    further,   but   for   our   purposes
Equation  10.51  is  merely  a convenient  alternative  expression  for  r„ (T).

sProblem 10.3
(a)   Use Equation  10.42 to calculate the p•eometric phase change when the infinite square  well 
expands  adiabatically  from  width  in   to width  in,. Comment  on this result.


382         Chapter  10    T/ e  Adiahatic  Approxittuitioti

(b)   If  the  expansion  occurs  at  a constant  rate (‹m›/  lt       r),  what  is  the dynamic 
phase  change  for  this  process?
(c)   If  the  well  now  contracts  back  to  its original  size,  what  is  Berry's  phase  for 
the cycle?

Problem  10.4  The  delta  function  well  (Equation  2.114)  supports  a  single  bound state  
(Equation  2.129).  Calculate  the  geometric  phase  change  when  tr  gradually increases  froin 
el   to ai.   If  the increase  occurs  at  a constant  rate  [‹la/dt  —— c), what


Prohlem  1.0..S   $how    that    if   G„(i)   ix      rent,    the   geometric    phase    
vanishes. (Problclns  10.3  and  10.4  are  examples  of  lhis.)  You  might  try  to  bear  the  
rap  by tacking  an  unliecessaiy  (but  perfectly  legal)  phase  factor  onto  the  
eigenfunctions:
/„(i)      e'’  "  f„  (t), where  Q„ (R) is an  arbitrai y (real)  function.  Try  it.  You’11  
get  a nonzero geolnetric  phase, all right, but note what  happens  when you put it back into 
Equation  10.23.  And  for  a clo.ord  loop  it  gives  z.em.  MOl‘fll:  For  nonzero  Berry's 
phase,  you  need  (i)  more  than  one  time-dependent  parameter  in  the  Hamiltonian, and  lii) 
a Hamiltoniali  that  yields  nontrivially  complex  eigenfunctions.


Example  10.2     The  classic  example  of  Berry's  phase  is  an  electron  at  the  ori- gii,  
subjected  to  a  magnetic  field  of  constant  magnitude  but  changinp•  direction. Consider  
first  the special  case (analyzed  in Example  10.1) in  which B(f) precesses around  at  a  
constant  aligular  velocity  in,  making  a  fixed  angle  e   with  the  z  axis. The e.vcicl  
solution  (for an electron  that  starts  orit  with  *spin up”  along B) is given by  Equation  
10.33.  In  the  adiabatic  regime,  in  «    •1.



and  Equation  10..33  becomes


— sln a sin
1
As  m/m    —+  0 the  secnnd  term  drops  out  completely,  and  the  result  matches  the 
expected  adiabatic  form  (Equation  10.23).  The  dynamic  phase  is


Eg(I’) ‹It’  ——  — I|f
2
[10.54]




(where  E+  =  ii<1/2, from  Equation  10 29),  so  the  geometric  phase  is


For a complete cycle  T  —— 2n/in, and  therefore  Berry's  phase is



Now  consider  the  more  general  case,  in  which  the  tip  of  the  magnetic  field

r =  B0 (Figure  10.9). The eigenstate  representing  spin  up along B(r)  has  the fonn (see  
Problem  4.30):

[10.57]

where 8  and  Q  (the  spherical  coordinates  of  B)  are  now  both  functions  of  time.



1
r sin


1                   0
r sin 8     ic'    sin(8/2)



Q.     [10.58)


Hence

(2p|4J+) —  2       — sin(8/2) cos(6/2) 6 +  sin(P/2) cos(tP /2) 8 -l- 2i'ifl


$
sifl

2’  Q

— i                                                                                                 
         [10.591
r  sln P













tude  but  changing  direction  sweeps  out  a  closed




For Equation  10.51  we  need  the curl  of  this quantity:



'V x(y+|Vy+) =  '  '  sin8

According  to Equation  10.51,  then,
i sin*(IP /2)           = i
[10.60]

a.



cycle,  so la   =  r-  d R i,   and  we conclude  that


y+(T) =  —
[10.62]



result  and  tantalizinply  reminiscent  of  the classical  problem  with which  we began the  
discussion  (transport  of  a  frictionless  pendulum  around  a  closed  path  on  the sur ace o  
t  e e            says      t     you  ta  e     nagnet  an    ea   t  e e ec  on s spin around  
adiabatically  in an arbitrary  closed  path,  the net  (geometric)  phase change will  be  minus  
one-half  the  solid  angle  swept  out  by  the  magnetic  field  vector.
In  view  of  Equation  10.37,  this  general  result  is  consistent  with  the special  case




s s sProblem 10.6  Work  out  the  analog  to  Equation  10.62  for  a  particle  of  spin  1.



10.2.3  The Aharonov-Bohm  Effect
In  classical  electrodvnamics  the  potentials  fa   and  A)1-  are  not  directly  measur- 
able—the  physical  quantities  are  the  electric  and  magnetic  fiel‹:1s:




'   It  is customary  in  quantum  mechanics  to  use  the  letter  V  for  lotetiticil  ritergJ-,  
but  in  electro- dynamics  the same  letter  is ordinarily  reserved  for  the scalar  potential.  
To avoid  confusion  I  use ‹p  l'or the  scaliii‘ potential.  See  Problcms  4.59.  4.60.  and  
4.61  for‘ background  to  this  section.



Section 1.0.2:  Bei rv’s Phase         385

The  fundamental  laws  (Maxwell’.s  equations  and  the  Lorcntz  force  nile l  iriake  n‹i

convenient  but  dispensable  theoretical  constructs.  Indeed,  you  can  ii iih  iiiq:tii*!:
r/i lfi,qe  the  potentials:




and  it  has no effect  on  the fields (as you  can easily  check  using  Equation  10.63).
In  quantum  mechanics  the  potentials  play  a  more  sipnihcant  role,  for  the




Nevertheless,   the   theory   is   still   invariant   under   p•auge   transformations   (see 
Pi‘obleni 4.61),  and  for  a  long  time  it  was  taken  for  panted  that  there  could  be no 
electromagnetiC lllfliiences  in regions  where E and B are  zero—any  more  than there can be in 
the classical  theory. But in 1959 Aharoiiov and Bohni '3 showed  that the  vector  potential  ‹min 
 affect  the  quantum  behavioi’ of  a  charged  particle,  even
when  it  is lnoving  through  a region  in which  the field  itself is zero. I’ll  woik  out a


Imagine  a  pai‘ticle  constrained  to  inove  in  a  circle  of  radiirs  ñ  (a  bead  on  a wire  
ring,  if  you  like).  Along  the  axis  runs  a  solenoid  of  radius  ri  <  b, carrying

the magnetic  field inside it is uniform, and the field outside is zero. But  the vector potential  
outsidc  the solenoid  is riot  zero: in  fact  (adopting  the convenient  p•aup•e
COl        lOfl





solenoid  it.self  is  uncharted,  so  the  scalar  potential  p  is  zero.  In  this  case  the 
Hamiltonian  (Equation  1.0.65)  becomes

[10.67]

'"Y. AliaLonuv  anal   D.  Bolini.  Ph; s.  lieu .  115.  485  (1959).  For  a  significant   
precursor.  sec
W. Ehrcnberg :ind  R. fi. Siday.  Prof.•.  Plts s. Silr. L‹›itcloti  Bfi2. 8 y 194'9J.
'  See.  I‘m instiince. D. J. Gi ifl'i the. /iirr‹ir/nc‘tirin i‹› Ele‹’trocl;vtumic.‹. 3rd ed.. 
Prentice Haiti.  LJp{acr Snddle  River.  NJ  i 1999).  Ettuutit›n  5.71.



























passes.


so 4  —›  (Q//›)(£f/dQ), and  the Schriidinper  equation  reads


1         fi -   ‹/-

(g)       EQ($).              [10.68a


This  is a linear differential  equation  with constant  coefficients:
d     +r/ =0,           [10.b9]

where
§  =   '           and    c                      — Q'.                               [ 10.70]

Solutions  are of  the  fomi




Continuity  of     ($), at $  =  2u, requires  that  X  be an integer  .


Section  1.0.2:   Berry's  Phnse          387

and  it  follows  that


it  —  2   fi



In  —— 0.      1.     2. ...   ).              [10.74]
The solenoid lifts the two-fold degeneracy of the bead-on-a-ring (Problem 2.46): Positive  ii, 
representing  a particle  traveling  in  the  .tune  direction  as  the current  in the solenoid, 
has a somewhat  lower   energy (assuming  q is positive) than negative ii, describing  a particle 
traveling in the op ›osite direction. More important,  the allowed energies  clearly  depend on  
the  field inside  the .solenoid,  e›•eii  though  llie field at llie oc'a ion o     ie  yar ie e 
is zet“o .‘
More  generally,   xuppnxe  a  particle  ix  moving   through   a  reginn   where  R   is zero  (so 
 V  x  A  =  0),  but  A  itself  is  riot.  (1’11  assume  thai  A  is  static,  although the 
method can be generalized  to time-dependent  potentials.) The (time-dependent)


10.75

with potential  enerp•y  V —which  may  or may  not  include  an electrical  contribution
q‹p —can  be simplified  by  writing




where



A(r )   dr'.
[10.7b]


[10.77]

an          s so   e        i rar   y      osen   re   rence po n       o e              s    e  ni 
 on  n    es

integral  would depend on  the pfir/i  taken  from N  to r,  and hence  would  not  define a 
function  of  r.  In  tennis  of  T',   the gradient  of  T  is


but  4q   =  (ry //i)A, so



'   It  is  a  peculiar  property  ol‘ superconducting  rines  th:it   the  enclosed  tlux  is  
qiiatiii-eel:   4›  =
i 2s h /q  it  .  whcrc ii' is ‹in integer. In thitt case the cflcct  is undctcctiiblc, since Egg  
——  Hi   /2ilifi' )(ii +ii')  .

tin  electron:  the’ su}ierconducting  clcctrons  ai c locked  together  in  piiirs. j Htiwevei’.  
flux quantization  is

cue
rce      y     c
np•    us                 n            p     c        c        c      o     y
the  stilcnoid  ol   tire  clcctrolnacnctic  field,  and  it  does  hot  occur  in  the  
(nonsupcrconductin#)  example ctinsidcl ccl  here.


388          Ch ipter 10    The Adi‹zhatic  App roximation

and  it  follows  that
[10.79)


Putting  thls  lnto Equation  10.75,  and cancelling  the coininon  factor e'*, we arc  left

—2,a,*'     +  v*r’ =  »                                   lf0.b0j

Equation  10.80,  correcting   for  the  presence  of  a  (curl-free)  vector  potential   will be  
trivial:  Jusl  tack  on  the  phase  factor  e'’*.

is split  in  two.  and  passed  either side of  a  lonp•  solenoid,  before  beinp•  recombined 
(Figuie  10. 11).  The  beams  are  kept  well  away  front  the  solenoid  itself,  so  they 
encounter  only  regions  where B  =  0. But  A,  which  is  given  by  Equation  10.6b,  is nor  
zem   and  I assuming   V   is  the  xaine  on  hoth  sides)   the  two  beainx  arrive  with 
dip'ei eiit  j›lirises.’

[10.81a


is  to saw,  in  the same direction  a.s the cunent  in the  solenoid.  The beams  arrive out















Beam split

Beam recombined




Solenoid

FIGURE 10.11:    The  Aharonov-Bohm   effect:  The  electron  beam  splits,   with  half passing 
either side of a long solenoid.


Sectioit  1.0.2:  Berr)!’s Ph ise         389


(r — R)










FIGURE 10.12:    Particle confined  to a box, by a potential V(r -  R).

of  phase by an  amount  proportional  to the magnetic  fiux  their  paths encircle:



This phase shift leads to measurable interference (Equation  10.47), which has been confirmed  
experimentally  by Chambers  and  others.

effect  can  be  regarded  as  an  example  of  p•eonietric   phase.  Suppose  the  charged
particle  is confined  to a box (which  is centered  at  point  R  outside  the solenoid)  by
ga  po enusee                        rn      n on en   we   e  geoing   o   r  nspo
the  hox  arnund  the  xolenoid   so R  will  become  a function  nf  time,  but  for nnw  it  is
just  soine  fixed  vector.) The eigenfunctions of  the Hamiltonian  are determined  by



We  have already  learned  how  to solve equations  of  this form: Let




where'⁷


A(r')   rf r  .


[10.85]


'”R. G.  Chambers.  P/tive.  R‹•i'.  Lc•ii.  E, 3 ( 196()).
'   It  is con vcnient  lvi  set  the rel'crence  point  C7  :tt  the  center  of  the  bt›x.  lor  
tliix  ¿t.uaianlccs  Hi‹it  we
recover  the orig•inal  phase convention  when  we  complete  the journey  around  the  solcntiid. 
11" you  use  a
pop                                                  p                                   r          
                                                                                s                   
                                                s
the  path  will  have  wrapped  al ound  the  stilcnoid.  circlinp•  regions  whcrc  the  curl  
tit’ A   does  not  vanish.

use
s  c    s      c    c   y     c sa n        swc
w  y                      ge  e             c   c            g     c p
convention  for  the  eigenfunctions  in  Equ:ition  10.9.  you  want  to  make  .sure  that  /„  
(.v. T)  =   /„  (.r, 0).
str  that  no  spurious  ph‹ise  eh.1lâeCS  iI£C  iRffOJtlced.





and  J'   satisfies  the same eigenvalue  equation,  only  with  A —› 0:

[10.86J

o ice     a      ,   s a   unc  on oi  y  o      e   isp ace nel     r            no     i  e       
  o   r and  R separately.
Now  let's  carry  the  box  around  the  solenoid  (in  this  application  the  process

tea
oesn  t  e  en    ave   o    e  a
at c)     o    ete     ne     erry s  p  a  e     e  inus       st
evaluate  the quantity  (J   |fig J„). Noting  that


R ti›   =  4R   e'  „f
(r — R)   =  —i *— A(R)e'* f„ (r — R) + e'   4 z f„(r — R).

we







—  —i —AfR                 r  — R             r  — R                                      10.87
The 4    with  no  subscript  denotes  the  gradient  with  respect  to  r,  and  I  used  the ac   
                       , w  en ac ing on  a   unc ion o                               as  integra   
is i//: times  the expectation  value of  momentum,  in an eigenstate of  the Hamiltonian
—(/i'/2ix )4-  +  V,  which  we know  from Section  2.1 is  zero. So


—A(R).

Putting  this into  Berry's  formula  (Equation  10.45).  we conclude  that

p,(T)              A(R)   dR —         (9    x  A)   la

[10.88)



[10.89)

which  neatly  conhrms  the  Aharonov-Bohm  result  (Equation  10.82),  and  reveals that  the  
Aharonov-Bohm  effect  is a  particular instance  of  geometric  phase.l'
What  are  we  to  make  of  the  Aharonov-Bohm  effect?  Evidently  our  classi- cal  
preconceptions are simply  mistaken :  There  coii  be electromagnetic effects  in


'“InciJcntally, in II  is case thc analogy  bctwccn  Derry's phasc and  rnaenctic  flux (Equation  
10.50) is  ci/hir.s/  an  idcntity:    B” ==  (‹j/h )B,


Fiit tl ei  Profi/erms  [or  Cl   ipter  1.0           3.9.1

measurable—only  the  enclosed  Qtr.r  comes  into  the  final  answer,  and  the  theory
i'eniains  gauge  invariant.


Problem  10.7
(a)   Derive  Equation  10.67  from  Equation  1.0.65.
(b)   Derive  Equation  10.79,  starting  with  Equation  10.78.


FURTHER PROBLEMS FOR CHAPTER  10
s  s  sProblem 10.8   A  particle  starts  out  in  the  p•round  state  of  the  infinite  square  
well (on  the  interval  0 < .r  <  a).  Now  a  wall  is  slowly  erected,  slightly  off-center: 
ˡ'


where   /’(r)  rises  gi adually  from  0  to  en.  According  to  the  adiabatic  theorem,  the

(a)   Find Iand sketch) the ground state at r  —+  on. Biol:  This should  be the ground state of 
the infinite square  well  with  an iiiipenetrable barrier at a/2 +  c.  Note that  the  particle  
1s  confined  to  the  tslightly)  larger  left  “half”  of  the  well.
(b)   Find  the (traliscendental) equation  for  the ground  state of  the Hamiltonian  at
time  t.  AYI Sii'ei.

c sin c =   T[com .  — cos(c6)).

where  c       kti, T       itici{’  t)/Ii -,   b      2e /‹i,  and  k       cii       E/Ii.
ve grap   lca                              ow             e sma   es

(d)   Now  set  d  =   0.0 I  and  solve  numerically  for‘  -,   u.sing  T  —  0,  1,  5,  20.  
100,
and  1000.
(e)   Find  the  probability   Pin  that  the  particle  is  ill  the  rlp•ht  “half'  of  the  
well,
as  a  function   Of  (   ill2d  6•   AI1SV!€^I.    P,-   ——   I /[ I  +      I +/I       )),   
where   I
1      6 — (1/c) sin (c(1       6))) siny'[c( 1        6)/2].    Evaluate    this   expression
numerically  for  the  T’s    in  part  (d).  Conunent  on  your  results.

"Julio Ge‹i-Biinaclochc, Am. J. Pltys. 70. .307 (2002) uses a rcciangulai  banier: the 
delta-function
ver.sion  w:\s sugycxtcd b'y  M. L:ikncr und 1. Pctci‘ncl(. .ñm. /. Ph)'.s.  71. 510 (?-00J).


392           Chapter 10    The Adiabatic Appt-oxinsa tioii

(f)   Plot  the  ground  state  wave  functlon  for  those  same  values of T  and 6. Note how  it  
gets squeezed  into  the  left  half  of  the  well,  as  the  barrier grows.-⁰

s s  sProblem  10.9  Suppose   the  one-dimensional  harmonic   oscillator   (mass  ni,  fre- 
quency  n›) is subjected  to a driving  force of  the form  F[t) — mu›'f[t), where  /’(r) is  some  
specified  function  (I  have  factored  out  trim    for  notational  convenience;
.{(r)  has  the dimensiOns  of  fenpf/i).  The Hamiltonian  is

*(')' 2»‹3.-+                     [ 10.90]

This  system  can  be  solved  exactly,  both  in  classical  mechanics  and  in  quantum 
mechanics.-'
(a)   Determine  the  tlnssical  positlon  of  the  oscillator,  assulning  it  started  from rest  
at  the origin (.r, (0) =  .i, (0) =  0).  Aitsu!ei  .

iy()=i   /( )sin[o( - f)]ff.        [ 10.91]

(b)   Show  that  the solution  to the (time-dependent) Schriidinper  equation  for  this 
oscillator,  assuming  it  started  out  ln  the nth  state  of  the  tuidi inert  oscillator (4  
(.r. 0)  —  /„  (.r)  where  J„  (.r)  is  given  by  Equation  2.61),  can  be  written




(c)   Show  that  the  eigenfunctions  and  eigenvalues  of  H{t)  are



(d)   Show   that   ln   the   adiabatic   approximation   the   classical   position   (Equa- tion 
 10.91)  reduces   to  .  , (/)   =     /(r).  State  the  precise  criterion  for  adia-

Wrlte   sin[in(r   —  r')J   as   (l/m)(d/di’) cos[in(r   —  r’)]   and   use   integration by  
parts.

*  Cieu-ijanuclochc (fiiotnote  l9) discusses  the  evolution  of  the  wave  function  u’i//i‹ ml  
uxsurning
the adiabatic  theorem,  and confirms  these  results  in  the adiabatic  limit.
-' See  Y.  Nogami,  Am. J. Plt;!s. 59. 64 ( 1991),  rind  re1'erenccs  thcrein.


lii'thei“ T’t“Ol2lems  jot  Cb'•hler 10         393
(e)   Confirm  the  adiabatic  theorem  for  this  example,  by  using  the  results  in  (c) an    
      o s  ow

10.94j
Check  that  the dynamic  phase  has the correct  form  (Equation  10.39).  Is  the geometric  
phase  what  you  would  expect?

ro    e                          a  ia  a ie approXll   a iol  c  n   e regar  e   as    e   rs   e 
      n a

starts  out  in  the  nth  state;  in  the  adiabatlc  approximation,  it  reiii‹iii7.t   in  the  
nth state,  picking  up only  a  tilne-dependent geometric  phase  factor (Equation  10.21):


( s)      S uhst iOtfr‘   th i 8   intm   the”  right   «irlr‘   nd  P.q›\ stinn   1.0.1 h   tm  
mhts in   th/•   “fi  rat”  r'nr-
rection”  to adiabaticity:

‹ /  .    [1   .9  ]

This  enables  ux  to  calculate  transition   prohabilitiex   in  the  ii«arl›'  zâi ahntic 
rep•inie.  To develop  the “second correction,”  we would  lnsert  Equation  10.95 on     erg       
 sl  e o     quaton              an    soon
(b)   As an example,  apply Equation  10.95 to the drlven oscillator (Problem  10.9). Show  that  
(in  the near-adiabatic  approximation) transitions  are  possible  only to  the  two  ilnmediately 
 adjacent  levels,  for  which




2/i
(The  transition  ;1iol›abilities  are  the  absolute  square.s  of  these,  of course.)












CHAPTER 11

















11.1.1  Classical Scattering  Theory
Imagilie a particle incident on some scattering celiter (say, a proton fired at a heavy
nucleus).  It  comes  in  with  energy  E  and  impact  parameter  fi,  and  it  emerges  at
.some scattering angle 8 —see Figure  11.1. (I’11 assume for slniplicity  that the tar- get  1s  
aziinuthally  syinliietrical,  so  the  trajectory  1 emalns  in  one  plane,  and  that the  
target  is  very  heavy,  so  the  recoil  is  negligible.)  The  essential  problem  of classical  
scattering  theory  is  this:  Gii›eii  the  Ifi   ff£‘f  J7Af/ fIfJ7£'ff/’,  CCl!Ctl!fI(C'fflC  
SCSI- ter ing  angle.  Ordinarily.  of  course,  the  smaller  the  impact  parameter,  the  
greater the scattering  aligle.











FIGURE 11.1:     The classical scattering problem, showing  the impact parameter  b and
the scattering  angle 8.


Section  1 1.1:  liitroduction           395






















Example  11.1    Hard-sphere   scattering.  Suppose   the  target   is  a  billiard  ball,

(Figure  11.2).  In  terms  of’ the  anp•1e  ‹r,  the  impact  parameter  is  b  =   B sin a,   and 
the  scattering  angle  is 8 =   v  — 2s,    so




Evidently
sin     2       2
cos
2 cos                      if  b      R,
if ñ >  R.
More   generally,   particles   incident   withln   an  infinitesimal   patch   of  cross- (Figure  
11.3).  The  larger  cfs  is,  the  bigger OR  will  be:  the  proportionality  factor,
D(8)      d   /df2,  is called  the differential  (scattering)  cross-section:'


see
s   s     rr          a  g    ge
r    s                            y  e  r
words  “dif'ferential  cross-section"  wt›uld  attach  more  naturally  to dv.    But  1’m  alraid  
we’re  stuck  with

yet
n      gy      sh          a          a
(   )                      ar                p    p e j       c
drrJul R —which  makes Equation  11 .3  look  like  a  tautology.  1  think  it  will  bc  less 
confusing  if  we give thc  diifcrential  cross-section  its own  sylnbol.

3f6          Ch ipter 11    Scattering



da










FIGURE 11.3:     Particles incident  in the area d‹r  scatter into the solid angle df2.



dv  ——  D[8) dR.



D(P)          b      lb
[11.3]



[11.4]

tsince  8  is  typically  a  deci'easing  function  of  f›,  the  derivative  is  actually  nega-



scattering  (Example  l 1.1)

[11.5]


SO
D(8)         cos(8/2)     fi sin(8/2)         R’
sln 8                  2                   4
[11.61
This example is unusual, in that  the differential  cross-section  is independent  of 8.


The  total cross-section  is the integral  of  D(8), over all  solld  angles:


[11.7)




roughly speaking, it is the total area of incldent  beam that is scattered  by the target.


[11.8]


BB's incident  wlthin  this area wlll hit  the tar•qet. and  those farther out will  miss lt 
completely. But the virtue of the forlTlalisiii developed  here is that it applies just as well  to 
“soft”  targets (such as the Coulomb  field  of a nucleus)  that are not  simply

Finally, suppose we have a beam  of incident  particles, with uniform  intensity (or luminosity,  
as particle  physlcists call it)
€      number of  incident  particles  per  unit  area.  per unit time.            [11.91
The  number  of  particles  entering  area  dir (and  hence  scattering  into  solid  angle
dR), per unit  time,  is dN       £ do       £  D(P) d R,  so
D(0) —  1 dN                                              [11.10)
ThlS  iS  often  taken  as  the  defiiiitioii   of  the  differential  cross-section,  because  it

accepts  partlcles  scatterinp•  into  a  solid  angle  dR,   we  silnply  count  the iii,iiiiber 
recorded,  per  unit  tiine,  divide  by  dfl,  and  nonnalize  to  the  luminosity  of  the inci  
ent   earn.

»Problem  11.1  Rutherford  scattering.  An incident particle of charge q;  and kinetic energy  E 
scatters off a heavy stationary  particle of charge q,.
(a)  Derive  the  formula  relatlng   the  impact  parameter  to  the  scattering  angle.'
Aiiswei .  It      (r/  ry°/8s •0*)cot(8/2).
(b)   Determine  the differential  scattering  cross-section.  Ansii›ei.


             qI•i:           
I 6x«0£ sin'(8/2)

11.l I]
(c)  Show  that the total cross-sectlOn  for Rutherford  scattering  is iiifiiiite. We say that the 
1/r   potential  has “infinite  range”;  you can’t escape from a Coulomb


-This  isn‘i  easy.  ano  you  might  w‹im  to  reier  to  a  fiooK  on  ciassicai  mechanics,  
sucii  iis  Perry
U. Maricn  and  Stcphcn  T. ThcmtUn.  Cl‹issicnl  D)'iinitiics ‹›(P‹irIic ie.‹ mid  S).‹leiiis. 4th 
 cd., Saunders, t                             )


3f8             h•hter 11    Scattering












FIGURE 11.4:    Scattering  of  waves;  incoming  plane  wave generates  outgoing  spheri- cal 
wave.

11.1.2  Quantum Scattering Theory
In  the  quantum  theory  of  scattering,  we  imagine  an  incident  plane  wave,     (r) = Ae'  
-”. traveling  in  the     direction,  which encounters  a scattering  potential,  produc- ing  an  
outgoing  spliei ie'al   wave  (Figure  11.4).'  That  is,  we  look  for  solutions  to




(r. 8)       A    e' “   +     /‘(8) e'""

for  large r.
[11.12)


(The  spherical  wave  carries  a  factor  of  1/r,  because  this  portion  of  |J  |-  must  go 
like  1/r'  to conserve  probabllity.)  The  wave  number  k  is related  to the energy  of the  
incident  particles  in  the  unual  way:



As bel'oie. I shall assume the target is azimuthally  symmetrical; in the more general case  the  
alnplitude      of  the  outp•oing  spherical  wave  could  depend  on  $  as  well as 8.

"For the  mtHnent.  there's  not  much  quaiiliiiit   mechanics  In  this:  what  we're really  
talking  about is  the  scattering  of‘  ivaves.  os  opposed  to  classical  p ii‘ticles.  ’and  
you  could  even  think  of Figure  l 1.4
•is  a  nirtiirr.  ref  walrr  w:ryes  enoriiiniertn n  .i  rrirk   iii  (br.i ter   sinre.  
wr.’rr.  inleresteii  in  I hrnn-dimnnsirin.it
scattcring)  sound  waves  bouncing  ol'f a  basketball.  In  that  case  we'd  write  the wave  
function  in  thC real
term
!«  (k-) + t(a›  »(i› + ii   ] .
and   /’(P)  would  represent  the  amplitude  of  the scattered  sound  wave  in  the direction  
8.


Section 11.2:  Partial Wuve Amul)!sis         399







FIGURE 11.5:    The  volume  dV of  incident  beam  that  passes  through  area  dc   in
time df.

you  the   irnhrihilfz!  nf.srrittri itig  iii, ri  p.risen  dii-rrtion  0,  and  hence  is  
related  tn  the differential  cross-sectlon. Indeed,  the probability  that  the incident  
particle,  traveling at speed  r,  passes through  the infinitesimal  area dw, in time dt,  is (see 
Figure  11.5)

d P'     I    incidcnt!' d V  —  | A|'(» di) do+
But  this  is equal  to the  probability  that  the particle  scatters into the corresponding solid 
 angle df2:



from  which it  follows  that  dc        J’ '  dR,    and  hence


[11.14]

Evidently  the  differential  cross-sectlon  (which  is  the  quantity  of  interest  to  the 
experimentalist) is equal  to the absolute square of  the scattering  amplitude  (which

will  study  two  techniques  for  calculating   the  scattering  amplitude:  partial  wave
analysis  and  the  Born  approximation.

Problem 11.2  Construct  the  analogs  to  Equation  11.12  for  one-dimensional  and 
two-dimensional scattering.



11.2  PARTIAL
WAVE ANALYSIS
11.2.1  Formalism
As we found  in Chapter 4, the Schrddinger  equation for a spherically  symmetrical pote  t a       
    a      t   t  e sep       e so u ion
(r. 8. Q)      R(i  )Y|“ (P. Q).                                    [11.15]


er

where  Y“'  is a  spherical  harmonic  (Equation  4.32),  and  ii(r) =  r fi(r)  satisfies  the 
radial  equation  (Equation  4.37):

— ñ"-  d"-ii

+      V  r   +
h!-  1[1 +   1)
ii       Em.                      11.16

At  ther;!  large  r  the  potential  goes  to  zero,  and  the  centrifugal  contribution  is neg- 
ligible,  so




the  first  term  represents  an outpoiiiz  spherical  wave,  and  the second  an ixroiiiing 
one—for  the scattered  wave we evidently  want  D     0. At  very  large r,  then,



(Equation  11.12).
That's  for  met    large  r  (more  precisely,  for  kr  45.1: in  optics  it  would  be

that  the potential  is “localized,”  in  the sense  that exterior  to soine finite scattering 
reglon  it is essentially  zero (Figure 11.6). In the intermediate  region (where  V can


[11.17]




Intermediate region










FIGURE 11.6:    Scattering  from  a  localized  potential:  the  scattering  region  (darker 
shading),  the  intermediate  region  (lighter  shading),  and  the  radiation  zone  (where Mr1    
1).

What  follows  does  not  apply  to  the  Coulomb  potential.  sincc  1/r   goes  to  zero  more  
slowly than  1 /i’-.  as  i’  —+  c›o.  and  the  centrifugal   term  docs  riot   dominiiic   in  
this  repion.  In  this  sense  the Coulomb  potential  is  not  localized.  and  partial  wave  
‹analysis  is  inapplicable.




TABLE 11.1:    Spherical  Hankel functions, h ''  (x) and fiJ2’(x).




1
1                   for.i >> 1

and the general solution (Equation  4.45) is a linear combination of spherical  Bessel unc ions:


However,  neither  y   (which  is  somewhat  like  a  sine  function)  nor  n   (which  is a

What  we  need  are  the  linear  combinations  analogous  to e'""  and  e  '”" ’,  these  are 
known as spherical  Hankel functions:



The first few spherical Hankel functions are listed in Table  11.1. At large r,  /i  ¹’{ki )

“Hankel  function of the second  kind”) goes like e  '”"‘/i  , for outgoing  waves,  then, we need  
spliei ical Hankel  functions of the fii st kind:



Thus  the  exact  wave  function.  outside  the  scattering  region  (where  V(r)  =


(i‘. 8.  $)   =   A                                                                           
[11.21)

The first  term is the incident  plane  wave, and  the sum (with expansion  coefficients represe    
       e  sc    ere         ve.          since  we    re  assuming      e  po en        is


*There's  nothing wrung  with 9 dependence, o1‘ course. because the inconñng  plane wave defines a 
.   tiircciiun,  Src‹ikiiip  iiic spiicriciti  syiiuiicuy.  But  tire nciuuuii‹ii  symmetry  rcmaii 
is, iiic  iiiciticni  piitnc wave  has  no  Q  dependence.  and  there  is  nothing  in  the  
scattering  process  thai  could  introduce  any  Q cpe        c                   g     gwae


er                    ermg

m  —— 0 survive  (remember,  Y”'       e””    ). Now  (froin  Equations  4.27  and  4.32)

[11.22]


coefficients,  letting C;.       i'+' 1        (?l +    )  i :







You”11  see  in  a  moment  why  this  peculiar  notation  is convenient;  u   is called  the

Now,  for  very  /ru;ge  r  the  Hankel   function  goes  like  (—i)'+' e'”"’/ kr  (Table 11.1),  
so


¥(i. 8) =   A   ‹’'“° +   /*(8)
[11.24]

where

COS


This confinns  more  rigorously  the general  stiuctuie  postulated  in  Equation  11.12, and  
tells  us how  to compute  the scattering  amplitude,  J’(6),  in terms of  the partial wave  
aiiiplitude.s  (a ). The differential  cross-section  is

•  P (cos 9) P,•(cos 9).       [1).26a

arid  the  total  cross-section  is




(T   u«en  rhe  nrthnynnn1ity   nf  Ihe  T  eyenrlre   nnlynninials,   F.n,i›atinn  4.14    tn  rln 
 the
angular  integration.)


11.2.2  Strategy
me                                           A    t    t re n   n    s to   eterl

e p    t a  wa  e    np   tu  es         or     e po ent  a    n

region (where V(r) is distinctly box -zero), and matching  this to the exterior solution (Equation  
11.23),  rising  the  appropriate  boundary  conditions.  The only  problem  is

Section  1.1.2:  Partial  Have  Anal ysis           403

that as it stands my notation is hybrid: I used s  lieric‹il  coordinates for the scattered
w ‹we,  u ui  i cii tea fun  cam  uiii‹iic.s  ioi   uic  inciuciii  w avc.   vrc  iiccu  in icwi 
its  tire  w ‹we
function  in a  more  consistent  notation.
Of  course,  e'”•  satisfies  the  Schriidinger  equation  with  P  =   0.  On  the  other
nanci,  i   just   argueci   tfiai   tfie   gei7erai   soiuuon   to  ifie  ñcfirociinger   equation 
  witfi
\/   —  N  rsn   he  wriltr•n   in  fhe'  fnrm




In particular,  then, it must  be possible to express e' ”  in this way. But e'" -”  is finite at  
the origin,  so  no  Neumann  functions  are  allowed  (ti  (ki  )  blows  up at  r  =  0), and  
since  * =  r cos 8  has  no Q dependence, only  ni  =  0 terms occur. The explicit


[11.28]

Using  this,  the  wave  function  in  the exterior  region  can  be expressed  entirely  in tenns 
of  r  and 8:


/(/. 8)      A
i'(21 +   I  )    | (ki  ) -I- i£ n/  lit I!(ti )t  P/ (cos 8).             [11.29a
0


Example  11.3    Quantum  hard-sphere scattering.  Suppose

on,    for i  < u.
0.      for r  > ri.



[11.30]

The  boundary  condition,  then,  is
#(n.P)= 0.


i' (21 -1- 1 )   .i/ (*•) + i£ ri  /J'    (ka)   P (cus 8)     0            [11.32]

for all  0   frnm  which  it  followx  f Problem  11.31  thai

[11.33]


”For  a  guide  to  the  proof.  see George  Ar(ken  alid  1-Ians-Jurgen  Weber,  Mailteiiiaiical 
Methods (or  Ph y. i‹-isir. 5ih  eâ..  Academic  Press,  Orlando (2000).  Exercises  12.4.7  and  
1.2.4.8.


404        Chapter 11    Scattering


In particular,  the total  cross-section  is

4         (2/ —I— 1)
/=0


j (kri)
/iJ ¹’(kn)


[11.34]
That's  the  e.met  answer,  but  it's  not  terribly  illuminating,  so  let's  consider  the 
limiting  case of  low-energ;!  scntterin$:  ka      1. (Since  k      2s/X,  this amounts  to 
saying that the wavelength is much greater than  the radius of the sphere.) Referring



n  (z)

•²'“l.         [11.35]


and  hence

4              1        2'/!

(kn)4!  -.
T=0        2
But  we're  assuming  ka        I.  so  the  higher  powers  are  negligible—in  the  low energy  
approximation  the scattering is dominated  by  the I  =  0 term.  (This  means that the 
differential  cross-section  i.s independent  of 8, just as it was in the classical case.) 
Evidently
o      4s n  .                                             [ l1.36]
for  low  energy  hard-sphere  scattering.  Surprisingly,  the scattering  cross-section  is
/oirr tiitfes  the geometrical  cross-section—in fact, w  is the total  sutfnce nreci o,[tlie 
sphere. This  “larger  effective  size”  is characteristic of  long-wavelength scattering (it would 
 be true in optics, as well); in a sense, these waves “feel” their way around the whole sphere,  
whereas classical y ni iir/es  only  see  the head-on  crosn-section.


Problem 11.3  Prove  Equation  11.33,  starting  with  Equation  11.32.  Urns:  Exploit the 
orthogonality  of  the  Legendre  polynomials  to  show  that  the  coefficients  with


+Problem  11.4  Consider  the case of  low-energy  scattering  from  a spherical  delta- function  
shell:

where  a  and  n  are constants.  Calculate  the scattering  amplitude,   f(8), the differ- ential  
cross-section,  Dt8), and  the  total  cross-section,    . Assume  km       1,  so  that




only  the  1       0  term  contributes  significantly.  (To  simplify  matters,  throw  out  all
erms  ng       rom     e  s               e  main  pro   em,  o   course,  is         eiermine
«0   Express  your  answer  in  terms  of  the  dimensionless  quantity  Q        2iiiaa//i-.
Answer:  o       4xo-Q-/(1 +  Q)-.



11.3  PHASE SHIFTS

V(.i)  on  the  half-line .r  <  0 (Figure  11.7). I'll  put  a  “brick  wall”  at .v  =   0,  so  
a wave incident  from  the left,

11.37

is en ireiy  re  ecie


Whatever  happens  in  the  interaction  region  (—o  < .i   <  0),  the  amplitude  of  the

of  probability.  But  it  need  not  have  the same  plc ise. If  there  were  no  potential  at 
all (just  the  wall  at x  =  0), then  B  ——  — A, since  the  total  wave function  (incident
us re  ec       mus      ni            eo

0(.=)=  A                                                                           [11.39]

wt  e potent      isao    ero     e            uncvt on    or     <    n   t    es t  eeor

11.40











FIGURE 11.7:    One-dimensional scattering  from a localized potential bounded on the right by an 
infinite wall.


I     Scattering

The  whole  theory  of  scattering  reduces  to  the  problem  of  calculating  the  phase shift’  
6  (as  a function  of  k,  and  hence  of  the  energy  E       h-k'-/2iti),  for  a  spec- ified  
potential.  We  do  this,  of  course,  by  solving  the  Schriidinger  equation  in  the 
scattering  region  (—o   <   .r   <   0),  and  imposing•  appropriate  boundary  conditions (see 
Problem  l 1.5).  The  virtue of  working  with  the phase  shift  (as opposed  to  the complex  
amplitude  B)  is  that  it  illuminates  the  physics  (because  of  conservation of probability,  
nll  the potential  can do is shift  the phase of  the reflected  wave) and simplifies  the 
mathematics  (trading  a complex  quantity—two  real  numbers—for  a sing e rea   quantity
Now   let's   return   to  the   three-dimensional  case.   The   incident   plane   wave (Ae'"! -) 
 carries  no  angular  lnomentum  in  the  z  direction  (Rayleigh's  formula  con- tains no tenns  
with ni      0),  but  it  includes  all  values of  the  foul  angular uiomen-

symmetric  potential),  each  partial  wave  (labelled  by  a  particular  I) scatters inde- 
pendently,  with  (again)  no  change  in  amplitude  —only  in  phase.  If  there  is  no 
potential  at all,  then  J0  = Ae'”’-‘, and  the /th  partial  wave is (Equation  11.28)


f(,"  ==  Ai'(Al +  I),| (kr) P (cos 8)     (7(/ )      0).
But  (from  Equation  11.19  and Table  1.1.1)
[l 1.41]




So for large r

/  ') = A'  2/ +
0                  2i kr
'’        ‘       (   1)'e*'"’   P (cos 8)    (P(r)  = 0).          [11.43]
The  second  term  in  square  brackets  represents  an  incoming  spherical  wave;  it  is 
unchanged  when we introduce the scattering potential. The first term is the outgoing wave. it 
picks  up a phase shift  6 :

2/ -J- 1
Hi ki
e'’'k'+"''  — (— I )'e°'“"    P (com 8)    (P(r)     0).      [11.44a

Think of  it as a converging  spherical  wave (due exclusively  to the /J‘   component in  e'  “), 
which  is  phase  shifted  26d  (see footnote  7)  and  emerges  as  an  outgoing spherical  wave 
(the  /iJl’ part of  e'"°  as well  as  the scattered  wave  itself).

7Thc 2 in  front  ol’ é  is conventional.  We think  of’ the  incident  waxe a.s  being  phase 
shifted once on  the  way  in.  tiled  again  on  the  way  out;  by  fi  we  mean  the  "one  way" 
 phase  shifi,  alid  the  rot‹if   is
t11CI”ClOFC  ?3.
'One rcason  this  subicct  can  be  so confusing  is  that  practiciilly  everything  is called  
an "ampli- tude:"  /(d)  is  the "scattering  amplitude,"  cil  is  the   panial  w‹ive  
amplitude."  bul  the  first  is :i 1'unclion oi’ fi. and boih  ai‘e ctimplex  numbers.  1’in now  
milking  about  "amplitude"  in the original  sense:  the   rral. of  course)  height  of  a  
.sinusoidiil  wave.




In Section 11.2. 1  the whole theory  was expressed  in terms o1 the partial  wave

must  be a connection  between  the two. Indeed, comparing  the asyoiptotic  (large r) form of  
Equation  11.23

‹zl + i)
2ikr
_            (2/ +  l)

with  the  generic  expression  in  tenns of b   (Equation  11.44).  we find

sin(6t).                         [l 1.46a

Tt  fn11nw s in  narticizlar  /Fnizatinn  1.1  ?ñ\  that





and  (Equation  11.27)
Z(2/ +l)e'    sin(6 ) P (com 8)
/——0



cr      4             (2/ -I- 1) sin'(6/).
/——0

[1 1.47]



[11.48]

Ap•ain,  the  advantage  of  working  with  phase  shifts  (as  opposed  to  partial  wave 
amplitudes)  is  that  they  are  easier  to  interpret  physically,  and  simpler  mathemat-

reduce  a complex  quantity  o   (two  real  numbers)  to  a  single  real  one 6 .

Problem 11.5  A particle of  mass ri  and energy  €  is incident  from the left on the en ia
0,
—n  < .   < 0
(.?   >   0).

(a)   If  the incoming  wave is  Ae'“ “    (where k           2    E  fñ), find the reflected  
wave.



k  — ik’   co\(k'a)
k +  ik’ cot(k’a)
(E + Vz)/ »


"Althuuuh   I  usctl  fhc  asymptutic   lone  c›I‘  thc  wave  lu»ctiun   tu  di”ay   the  
cunnccticn  hct  vccn

(iiidcpctidcnt  of’ r). and 6   ritc•nit.s  the  phase  shift  in  the  asyniptotic  region  (where 
 the Hankel  l'unctioiis

408          Cl› ibter 11     Scattet itie

(b)   Confirm  that  the reflected  wave has  the same amplitude  as the incident  wave.
(c)   Flnd  the  phase  shift  6  (Equation  11.40)  for  a  very  deep  well  (E   «     V0)-
Aiisivei .  b  ——  — kci.


(Example  11.3)?

Problem  11.7  Find the S-wave (/  =   0) partial  wave phase shift d0(k) for scattering from  a 
delta-function  shell  (Problem  11.4).  Assume  that  the  radial  wave  function ii(r)  goes  to 
0 as  r        oo.  An.«ver  ,


— cot   1     cot(I a) +
t.


b IU


11.4  THE BORN APPROXIMATION                                                                        
                  
) 4.4.1   Inregral  Form  of  the .8chriidinger F.quation



[11.49]

can  be  written  more  succinctly  as

[11.50)





This  has  the  superficial  form of  the  Helmholtz  equation:  note,  however,  that  the 
“inhomop•eneous'  term  (Q)  itsel,[  depends on  J.

with  a âeltn [imctioii  “source:”


Then  we  cotild  express       as  an  integral:

[11 .53)


Section 11.4:  The Borti  Approxiniutioti         409
For  it  is  easy  to  show  that  this  satisfies  Schrodinger's  equation,  in  the  form  of 
quation
(9'   —I- k2)J(r) =         (9* -1— k  )C(r   — r0)   O(r0)d3r0

(r — r0)fi(r0) d‘ r0 =  Q(r).
G(r)  is called  the  Green's function  for  the  Helmholtz  equation.  (In  p•eneral,  the Green's 
 function  for  a  linear  differential  equation  represents  the  “response”  to  a
ion source.
10 :
plished  by  taking  the Fourier  transform,  which  turns  the  diJereiifia/  equation  into an al 
¿ebraic  equation.  Let

54


Then


But

and  (see  Equation  2.144)



so Equation  11.52 says

(J     )3/2

It  follows' '  that


(2    )3/2















#(s) = (z•›' '‹i' —  •-)




[11.55)









[11.57j
Plotting  this  back into Equation  11.54,  we  find:

G(r) -=  (J  )3
e           1
(k2  — s2)
d3s.
''Wnriiiiig.'   You  arc  approaching  two  pages  of  heavy  analysis,  including  contour  int 
you  w'ish.  skip  straight  to  the  answer.  Eqn:ition  I 1.65.
' 'This is c Iearly .‹iifficieiii, but it  is also iic•c’err‹u)'. as you can show  by combining  
the into a single  integral.  and  using  Planchcrcl's  theorem.  Equation  2.102.

410          Chapter 11    Scattet ing









FIGURE 11.8:    Convement  coordinates  for  the integral  in Equatinn  11.58.

Now,  r is axed, as far as  the s integration  is concerned,  so  we may  as  well choose


sr cos 8,  the  Q  integral  is  trivial  (2s),  and  the 8  integral  is
eiJ ' cOS     ‘          2  sin(sr)
e'’”'           sin 8 da


[11.59]


Thus


G(r) =

    1      2           s sin( S
(2   )*       0        k    —  '“’ d"   —

   1               s sin(sr  
S  '2


ds.


[11.b0l
The  remaining  integral  is not  so simple.  It pays  to revert  to exponential  nota- tion,  and  
factor  the denominator:

G(r)                                                          ds  —      °°            se   '‘"“    
     ds
(s  — k)(s +  k)

[l 1.b1)

These  two integrals  can  be evaluated  using  Cauchy's  integral  formula:


[l1.OZj

if  z0  lies  within  the  contour  (otherwise  the  integral  is  zero).  In  the  present  case 
the integration  is along  the  real  axis,  and  it  passes right over  the pole  singularities

and  uitdei   the  one  at  +k  (Figure  11.9).  (You're  welcome  to  choose  some  other 
convention  if  you  like—even  winding  seven  times  around  each  pole—you'll  get a di“fferent  
Green  s tunction,  but,  as i  11  sfiow  you  in a minute,  tfiey  re  air  equally

For  each  integral  in  Equation  l 1.61  we  must  “close  the  contour”  in  such  a way  that  
the semicircle  at  infinity  contributes  nothing. In  the case of   1.  the  factor




irn(s





s —— —k
s —— +k      Re(s)
FIGURE  11.9.     SLiirind   tile:  pu1c:n   in    the
contour integral  (Equation  11.61).

e"’ʳ  goes  to  zero  when  s  has a  large positive  imaginary  part;  for  this one  we  close

se"'”          1                                                                                    
    [I   1.63]

In  the  case of  J2.  the  factor e°'”   goes  to zero  when  s  has a  large  negative  imagi-
singularity  at  s  ——  —k  (and  it  goes  around  in  the  clocMvise  direction,  so  we  pick up 
 a minus  sign):






G(r) —      i                    )          — in   e'”k)                                            
   [I   1.65]
r
This, finally,  is the Green's function for the Helmholtz equation—the  solution

the  result  by  direct  differentiation—see  Problem  11.8.)  Or  rather,  it  is a  Green's 
function  for  the  Helmholtz  equation,  for  we  can  add  to  G(r)  any  function  G0(r)

she
a   sa   s  es     e    o   oge  eo
o  z equa ion.
(4‘   +  k  )G0(r) =  0;                                            [I 1.66]


er                    erfn

clearly,  the  result  (G +  *0)  still  satisfies  Equation  11.52.  This  ambiguity  corre- 
sponds  precisely  to  the  ambiguity  in  how  to  skirt  the  poles—a  different  choice

Returning  to Equation  11.53, the general solution  to the Schrodinger equation takes  the form


ii‹ r—r



where  40 satisfies  the /ree-particle  Schrodinger  equation,
(4*   -F k²)
3r0.

[11.67]



[11.68]


equivalent  to  the  more  familiar  differential  form.  At  first  glance  it  looks  like  an 
explicit  solution  to  the  Schrfidinger  equation  (for  any  potential)—which  is  too

right hand side, so you can't do the intep•ra1 unless you already  know  the solution! 
Nevertheless,  the  integral  form  can  be  very  powerful,  and  it  is  particularly  well 
suited  to scattering  problems, as we’11 see in  the following  section.

Problem 11.8  Check  that  Equation  11.b5 satisfies Equation  I 1.52.  by direct  sub- stitution.  
I- iiir:  H-(l /r)  =  —4s6"(r).I*

s*   ro   e                 ow  t  a   t  e  groun    state  o     y  rogen     quat on           
sa  s  es the  integral  form  of  the Schrodinger  equation,  for  the appropriate  V  and  E  
(note that  E  is negative, so k =  ie,   where  K            2      /ñ).

11.4.2  The First Born Approximation
Suppose  V(•0) is localized about •0 =  0 (that is, the potential drops to zero outside soine 
finite region, as is typical  for a scattering problem), and we want to calculate

that contribute  to the integral  in Equation  I 1.67. so


and  hence



Saddle  River,  NJ. 1999). Section  1.5.3.

Section  1.1. 4:  The Born  Approximntioti           413
Let
then



e                                                                                                   
              [11.73)

(In   the  detiominntot    we   can   afford   to  make   the   more   radical   approximation
l• — <0l   =    i”,   in   me  exponent   we  neen   to  xeep   me  next   teriIl.   ii   tnis  
puzzles you,  try  writing  out  the  next  term  in  the  expansion  of  the  denominator.  What  
we are doing  is expanding  in powers of the small quantity  (r0/r’), and dropping  all but the  
lowest  order.)
In  the  case of  scattering,  we  want


Y0(r) =   Ae'  -“,
representing  an incident  plane wave. For large  r,  then,
[I 1.74j


iii    e'""
(r)         Ae"'  —  2s  /i2   ’
e     '“k-rbp  (g0)     (r0) d3r0.

[11.75)
This  is in  the standard  fonn  (Equation  11.12),  and  we can  read  off  the scattering 
amplitude:
[1.1.76a

So  far,  this 1s  e.Herr.  Now  we  invoke  the  Born  approximation:  Suppose  the incoming  
plane  wave  is  Dior  substniitinll y  nltei ed  b;  the  potential,  then  it  makes
sense  to  use



where
(r0) -    J0(r0) =   Ae"'!   =   Ae'‘k' r(                                 [11.77)

k' =  kz.                                               [1 I.78a

inside  the  integral.  (This  would  be  the exnct  wave  function,  if  V  were  zero;  it  is 
essentially  a ivenk  yotenti il  approximation.'") In  the Bonn approximation, then,



'(• '°)
  ...    ,
2..-
e'     h’r0Y(r0)d r0.

[11.79)


our  ci ui iy,   pm ii«i   » «   o  «i i«iy >i>  i>  u>  i ui  »  not i  trio  ii miner ii  p«i 
Li•io  ri«>  io»     oiioi py ,  i o•  :rioii only  the  first  few  terms  in  the  series  
contribute  significant ly;  the Bonn  approximation  applies  when  the potential  is  weak,  
cornpai ccl  to  the  incident  energy.  so  Ihc  deflection  is  small.













k’  = kñ
FIGURE 11.11:    Two   wave   vectors   in   the  Born “                  approximation: x   points 
in tne inciaetit  âixectioo, x
in the scanered  direction.

(In case you have lost track of the definitions of k’  and k, they  both have magnitude

toward  the  detector—see  Figure  11.11;  ti(k  —  k’)  is  the  momentum  transfer  in the 
process.)

factor is essentially constant over the scattering  region, and the Bonn approximation
simplifies  to



{(8. Q)      —         ,        V(r) f/‘ r,      (low  energy).
2   0-
[I 1.80)

(I dropped  the subscript  on r,  since there is no likelihood  of confusion  at this poiIit.)


Example  11.4    Low-energy  soft-sphere  scattering."   Suppose

0•
0.       if  i-  >   «.
In  this case  the  low-energy  scattering  amplitude  is


(independent  of  B  and  Q),  the  differential  cross-section  is
2n


[11.81]


[l  1.82]

and  the  total cross-section  is
2/fl*o•"





''You  can't  apply  thc  Bonn  approximation  to  finrr/-sphere  scattering  (Vp  =   on)—the  
integral blows  up.  The  puint   i.s  that   we  assuincd  the  putcntial   is  ›i'enk.  and  
dccsn't   chanyc  the  H'ave  function much  in  the  sc°attcring  rcgiun.  But  ‹I  Iinr‹I  
sphci°c  changes  it. rndirn//j’ —Drum   Ae'"'   tu  zer‹›.

Section 11.4:  The Born A§proxiinoiinii         415
For a spherically  symmetrical  potential,  V (r) — V(r) —but  not  necessarily

r        k’ — k,
and  let  the  polar axis for the r0  inte•ral  lie along  r,  so that
[11.85]
[11,86]

Then
e'"“(!‘   "’V(r   )r0  sin 80 dr0 d80 dQ0.
[11.87]


Thr•   men    intr• ors1   ie   tz•i x/ i s1     £?w    1     sn   rJ   the      An   intr• arse   
ie   nnr•   \  /r•   h ski+>   r•nr‘nJ tn tr• n•rl
before  (see Equation  11.59).  Dropping  the subscript  on  i , we are left  with

      r•
rV ti   sinffCrl dr.      fsnherical  svmmetrvL            I l 1.881


The angular  dependence  of      is carried  by  v; in  Figure  11.11  we see that

v =  2k sin(8/2).                                         [I 1.89]


Example  11.5     Yukawa  scattering.   The  Yukawa  potential  (which  is  a  crude
model  for  the  binding  force  in  an  atomic  nucleus)  has  the  form

[11.90

where  Q  and  y  are constants. The Bonn approximation  gives


‹    2+    K-)
(You  get  to  work  out  the  integral  for  yourself,  in  Problem  11.11.)


Example 11.6    Rutherford  scattering.  If  we  put  in  $   =   ml q2/4u•0. ii  =  0, the  Yukawa 
 potential  reduces  to  the  Coulomb  potential,  describing  the  electrical invcr‹tctiun  or  
twu  point  merges.  ñviueniiy  Inc sc‹ttvcring  ‹inipiituue  is

[l 1.92]

416          Chapter 11    Scattering


or (using Equations  11.89 and  11.51):
        qiq*.      
16x<0g sin*(8/2) The differential  cross-section  is the square of  this:

o i n-


[11.93]



[11.94]

which  is  precisely  the  Rutherford  formula  (Equation  11.11).  It  happens  that  for the 
Coulomb potential, classical  mechanics, the Born approximation, and quantum field  theory  all  
yield  the  same  result.  As  they  say  in  the  computer  business,  the Rutherford  formuia  is 
amazingly  “robust.



sProblem 11.10  Find the scattering amplitude, in the Bonn approximation, for soft- sphere   
scattering   at   arbitrary   energy.   Show   that   your   formula   reduces   to Equation  11.82 
in  the low-energy  limit.

Problem  I 1.I 1  Evaluate the integral  in Equation  11.91, to confirm the expression on  the 
right.

s sProblem 11.12  Calculate  the  total  cross-section  for  scattering  from  a  Yukawa potential, 
 in  the  Bonn  approximation.  Express  your  answer  as  a  function  of  E.


+Problem 11.13  For the potential  in Problem  11.4,
(a)  calculate  J (6),  D(d), and    , in the low-energy  Bonn approximation;
(b)  calculate  f{8) for arbitrary energies, in the Bonn approximation;
(c)  show that your results are consistent  with the answer to Problem  11.4, in the appropriate  
regime.


11.4.3  The Born Series
The  Bonn  approximation   is  similar  in  spirit  to  the  impulse  approximation  in classical  
scattering  theory.  In  the  impulse  approximation  we  begin  by  pretending

Sec.tion  1 1.4:  The Born Approximation           417
Actual
b
Scattering center

FIGURE  4 )  12•     The impulse approximatinn  assumes that the particle continues unde-
tected,  and calculates  the transverse  momentum  delivered.

that  the  particle  keeps  going  in  a  straight  line  (Figure  11.12),  and  compute  the 
transverse  impulse  that  would  be delivered  to it  in that case:

[11.95]

If  the  deflection  is  relatively  small,  this  should  be  a  good  approximation  to  the

B       tan* ' (//p).                                                    [11.96]
where  p is  the incident  momentum.  This  is, if  you  like,  the “first-order”  impulse 
approximation   ttne  zei’or0 -order  is  wnat  we  star tea   witn:  no  denection  at  ai9. 
Likewise,  in  the zeroth-order  Bonn  approximation  the incident  plane  wave  passes by with no 
modification,  and what we explored  in the previous section is really  the first-order correction  
to this. But  the same idea can  be iterated  to generate a series of  higher-order corrections,  
which  presumably  converge  to the exact answer.
The integral  fonn of  the Schrodinger equation  reads

J3 $

1(r)'        0(r) +      .fl(r              0)    (*0)1(  0)     r

where  'f0 is the incident  wave,
[11.97]




is the Green's function  (into  which I have now  incorporated  the factor 2in//i'. for 
convenience),  and  V  is the scattering  potential. Schematically,

[11.99)

Suppose  we  take  this expression  for J,   and  plug it  in under  the integral sign:

[11.100]


418        Chapter 11    Scattering






FIGURE 11.13:    Diagrammatic  interpretation of  the Born  series  (Equation  11.101).





In earh  integrand  nnly  the  iitciffriir  wavefrinrtion  ($!o   •rpearx  together  with  more and 
more powers of g Y.  The@sf   Bonn approximation  truncates  the series after  the second  term,  
but  it is pretty  clear  how  one  generates  the  higher-order  corrections.

In  zeroth  order       is  untouched  by  the potential;  in  first  order  it  is  “kicked”  
once, and then “propagates” out in some new direction; in second order it is kicked, prop-

context the Green's function is sometimes called  the propagator—it  tells you how the disturbance  
propagates  between  one interaction  and  the  next. The Bonn series was the inspiration  for 
Feynman's  formulation  of  relativistic  quantum  mechanics,

connected  together in Feynman  diagrams.

Problem  11.14  Calculate 8 (as a function of the impact parameter) for Rutherford scatterin•,  in  
the  impulse  apprnximation. $how  that  your  result  is consistent  with the exact  expression  
(Problem  11.1(a)),  in the appropriate  limit.

s s sProblem 11.15  Find the scattering amplitude for low-energy soft-sphere scattering



FURTHER PROBLEMS FOR CHAPTER  11

+Problem  11.16  Find  the  Green's  function  for  the  one-dimensional  Schriidinger equation,  
and  use  it  to construct  the  integral  form  (analogous  to Equation  11.67). Aiisivei.

[11,1021


Further  Pro6feitts for Cfiopfer 11        419



tion for one-dimensional scattering  (on the interval  —oo  < x  < on, with no “brick wall” at  the 
origin). That  is, choose  'f0tx)  —  Ae’’ᵏ’ , and  assume     ti0) =  /0(•o)

e“"”’V{x) dx                           [11.1031


com  ute  the  transmission  coefficient    T        1  —  R   for  scatterin    from  a  delta 
function (Equation  2.114) and from a finite square well (Equation  2.145). Compare your results  
with the exact  answers (Equations  2.141 and  2.169).


to the imaginary  part of the forward scattering  amplitude:
4x Vine:  Use Equations  11.47  and  11.48.
rob e    1   20  Use   he  Born  approxi   ation  to  dete     ne  the  total  cross sec ion



Express your answer in terms of the constants  A, y, and ni (the mass of the incident p   ticle)  
and            2   E/li   where  E   s the   nc dent e  ergy












CHAPTER  12

AFTF.RWORW



Now  that  you  have  (I  hope)  a  sound  understanding  of  what  quantum  mechanics

begun  in  Section  1.2.  The  source  of  the  problem  is  the  indeterminacy  associated with  
the  statistical  interpretation of  the  wave  function.  For  T  (or,  more  generally, the  r/ii 
umum  srfire —it  could  be  a  spinor,  for  example)  does  not  uniquely  deter- mine  the 
outcome  of a measurement;  all it  provides is the statistical  distribution  of possible  
results.  This raises a profound  question:  Did the physical  system “actually have” the attribute 
 in question prior   to the measurement  (the so-called realist  view- point),  or  did  the  act  
of  measurement  itself  “ci‘eate”  the  property,  limited  only  by the statistical  constraint  
imposed  by the wave function (the orthodox  position)—or can  we  duck  the  question  entirely,  
on  the  grounds  that  it  is  “metaphysical”  (the agnostic  response)?
According  to the realist, quantuiii  mechanics is an iitc-otiiylele theory,  for even
it  you know ei Rei   ilimg    itcmtum me‹’lutiiic    luis to tell ; cii  about  the system (to 
wit:

some  otliet   information,  external  to quantum  mechanics,  which  (together  with  T) is  
required  toi  a complete  description  of physical  reality.
The  orthodox  pusitioii  raises  eveL   Nlore  disturbing  pr     lems,  for  if  the  act  of 
measurement   forces  the  system  to  “take  a  stand.”  helping  to  ctente  an  attribute that  
was  not  there  previously,'   then  there  is  something  very  peculiar  about  the


' This  may   be  sirriiig‹'.   but   it   is   nut   ini'.s/irri/,   iis   some  popularizcrs   
would   like  to  suggest. The  so-called   wave-particle  duality.  which  Niels  Bolu   elevated  
to  the  .st‹itus  of  a  cosmic  principle (complementarity). in‹ikes  electrons  soui«l  like  
unpl'cdictable adolescents.  who .sometimes  bcli‹n'c  like




FIGURE 12.1:    Bohm's   version   of   the an electron-positron pair.

measurement  process.  Moreover,  in  order  to account  for the  fact  thai  an immedi- ately  
repeated  measurement  yields  the  same  result,  we  are  forced  to  assume  that

cult. at  best. to reconcile  with  the  normal evolution  prescribed  be the Schriidinger 
equation.
In  light  of  this, it is  no wonder  that  generations  of  physicists  retreated  to  the 
conceptual  foundations  of  the  theory.

12.1  THE EPR PARADOX                                                                               
                              

In  1935,  Einstein,  Podolsky,  and  Rosen²  published  the  famous  EPR  paradox,

is the only  sustainable  one.  I’11 describe  a simplified  version  of  the EPR  paradox, 
introduced  by  David  Bohni.  Consider  the  decay  of  the  neutral  pi  meson  into  an exec     
                 posi



ssu     ng     e p on  was a   res       e e ec ron  an    posi ron    y  o     n  oppo    e    
irec tions (Figure  12.1). Now, the pion has spin zero, so conservation of angular momen- tum  
requires  that  the electron and  positron  are in  the singlet  configuration:

12('—'+—'—'"       [12.1]
vice  versa   Ouantuin  mechanics  can't  tell  you  ivfiir/i  combination  you’11  p•et,  in any  
particular  pion  decay,  but  it  does  say  that  the  measurements  will  be  cor ie- e      n   
  ou     get  eac   co     inaton    a    t  e  t    e  (on  aver  •e      ow  suppose

adults,  and sometimes,  ter no particular rciison.  like children. I  prct'cr to aVoid SUCH  
).lIJgUi1%°C.  W hen 1 say
that  a  particle does  not  liiive  a  particul‹+  attribute  before  its urea.silrcment. I  have  
in  mind.  1’tir example.
an  e ectron  in  t ie spin  st‹ite  y  —   $     :  a  ineasurcliicnt  o   t ie .r-c‹›inponent  o  
 Its angu  ar  nx,imcntuni
could  rcturn  the  value  f:/2.  or  (z'ith  equal  probtibility)  the  value  —/:/2.  but  until  
the  measurement   is made  it  simply  doe s it‹›t  /irti'r  ‹i  well-defilicd  value  ol’ S   .
'A.     Elnstein.  B.   Podolsky.  and  N.  Rtiscn.  Plt\'.s.  R‹•i'.  47.  777  ( 1935).



422          Chripter 12    A[terword

we  let  the  electron  and  positron  fly  ivfi\   off— 10  meters,  in  a  practical  experi-

electron.  Say  you  get  spin  up.  Immediately   you  know  that  someone  20  meters (or   20   
light   years)   away   will   get   spin   down,   if   that   person   examines   the positron.
To  the   realist,   there's   nothing   surprising   in   this—the   electron   ienll;   had spin  
up  (and  the  positron  spin  down)  froin  the  moment  they  were  created   ... it's  just  
that  quantum  mechanics  didn't  know  about  it.  But  the  “orthodox”  view holds   that   
neither  particle   had  either  spin   up  or   spin   down   until   the  act   of measurement   
intervened:   Your  measurement   of  the  electron   collapsed   the  wave function,  and  
instantaneously  “produced”  the  spin  of  the  positron  20  meters  (or 20 light   years)  away. 
  Einstein,   Podolsky,   and  Rosen  considered   such   “spooky action-at-a-distance”   
(Einstein's    words)    preposterous.    They    concluded    that the   orthodox   position   is  
 untenable;   the   electron   and   positron   must   have   had well-defined   spins   all   
along,   whether   quantum   mechanics   can   calculate   them or not.
The  fundamental   assumption   on  which  the  EPR  argument   rests  is  that  no influence  can  
propagate  faster  than  the  speed  of  light.  We  call  this  the  princi- ple  of  locality.   
You  might  be  tempted  to  propose  that  the  collapse  of  the  wave function  1s  itoi  
instantaneous,  but  “travels”  at  some  finite  velocity.  However,  this would  lead  to  
violations  of  angular  momentum  conservation,  for  if  we  measured

would  be a  fifty-fifty  probability  of  finding  hotli  particles  with  spin  up. Whatever one  
might  think  of  such  a  theory  in  the  abstract,  the  experiments  are  unequiv- ocal:  No  
such  Violatioli  Occurs—the  (aliti-)correlation  of  the  spins  is  perfect.

instantaneous.


Problem  12.1  Entangled  states.  The  sinp•let  spin  configuration  (Equation  12.1) is  the  
classic  example  of  an  enniiIy/ed  state—a  two-particle  state  that  cannot  be expressed  as  
the  product  o1  two one-particle  states, and  for  which,  therefore.  one

whether  this  is somehow  an  artifact  of  bad  notation—maybe some  linear  combi- natioiof  the 
one-particle states would  disentangle  the system.  Prove the following


Consider a two-level  system, |Q„) and |Qt), With  (HiU/)      6i/. (For example,
|Q„)  might  represent  spin  up and  |Qt,)  spin  down.)  The  two-particle  state




(with e      0 and $      0) ccuutot  be expressed  as a product
J,-(1)) |J„ (2)).
for erry  one-particle  states |J,-)  and  |J,).





Einstein,  Podolsky,  and  Rosen  did  not  doubt  that  quantum  mechanics  is  cor red.'t,

reality:  The  wave  function  is  not   the  whole  story—some  other   quantity,   X,  is needed, 
 in  addition  to  T,   to  characterize  the  state  of  a  system  fully.  We  call  X

ads
e            en    aria   e      ecause
age   we    a  e  no     ea    ow   o  ca cu ae
or  measure  it.3  Over  the  years,  a  number  of  hidden  variable  theories  have  been 
proposed,  to  supplement  quantum  mechanics;‘  they  tend  to  be  cumbersome  and implausible,   
but  never  mind—until   1964  the  program  seemed  eminently   worth

is incompotihle  with quantum  mechani
Bell suggested  a generalization of  the EPR/Bohln  experiment:  Instead  of ori-

thein to be rotated independently. The first measures the coliiponent of the electron spin  in  the 
 direction  of  a  unit  vector  a, and  the second  measures  the spin  of  the positron  along  
the direction  b (Fip•ure  12.2).  For simplicity,  let's  record  the  spins

down).  along  the  direction  in  question.   A  table  of  results,  for  many  u"   decays, 
might  look  like  this:

electron                       product








"The  hidden  variable  could  be  a  single  number-,  ot-  it  could  be  a  whole  
c-‹›/ferri‹iii  ol’ numbers: perhaps   X   is   to  be  calculated   in  soine   future   theory.   
or   luaybe   it   is  l‘t›r   sonic   reason   of  principle incalculable.  it  hardly  waiters.  
All  I  ant  asserting  is  that  there  must  be .srnn‹•t/mite —if    only :t  list  o1‘ the

D. Bohm.  Phvs. Rvi•. 85. 1.66.  180  ( 1952).
Bell‘s oritinilJ  paper   Ph;  sic s  1.  195 (l9M)) is ii 3cin: briel'. accessible. and 
bcautil'nlly  written.


424       Chapter  12     A[terword









FIGURE  12.2:    Bell's  version  of  the  EPR-Bohm  experiment:  detectors  independently
                                                         oriented in directions a and b.            
                                                                                                    
                   


a  given  set  of  detector  orientations.  Call  this  average  P(a, b).  If  the  detectors  are 
parallel  (b =   a),  we  recover  the  original  EPRB  configuration; in  this  case  one  is spin 
up and  the other  spin  down,  so  the product  is always  — 1, and  hence  so too  is

P(a, a) =   — 1.                                                  [12.2]
By the same token, if they are nnti -parakeI  (b =  —a), then every product is + 1, so


P(a. —a)  — -}- l.
For arbitrary  orientations,  quantum  mechanics  predicts

#(a,b) - —a  b
[12.3]



[12.4]

(see  Problem  4.50).  What  Bell  discovered  is  that  this  iesult  is  incoHy9atible  ii›itli
oiij' local liiddeit  mm iable tlieoi; .
The  argument  is  stunningly  simple.  Suppose  that  the  “complete”  state  of  the 
electron/positron  system  is  characterized  by  the  hidden  variable(s)  X  (X  varies,  in some 
 way  that  we neither understand  nor control,  from one pion decay  to the next). Suppose  
further  that  the  outcome  of  the  electi-on  measurement   is  independent  of

experimenter at the positron end just before the electron measurement  is made, and hence far too 
late for any subluminal  message  to get  back  to the electron detector. (This  is  the  locality  
assumption.)  Then  there  exists  some  function  A[a. Z)  which glves  the  result  of  an 
electron  measurement,  and  some  other function  B(b, L)  for the positron  measurement.  These 
functions  can only  take on  the  values  I   1:⁶
Aia,  L)       1   1;      B(b, L)       1   1.                                    [12.5]

”This  alre‹idy  concedes  ter  more  than  a classical  determinist  would  be  prepared  to  
allow,  tor  it
                                                                 abandons  any  notion  that  the 
pal ticles could  have  well-defined  an•pular  momentum  vectors  with simul-             
taneously  determinate  components.  But  never  mind—the  point  of‘ Bell's  argument   is  to  
demonstrate
ihat  quantum  mechanics  is incompatible  with ciii'  local  deterministic  lheory— even  one  
thiil  bends  nver
backu'ards  to  be  accommodating.


$ectiotl  12.2:  Bell's theorem         425
When  the detectors are aligned,  the results are perfectly  (anti)-correlated:

for all  Z.
A(   , X)      — B(   . L) .
[12.6)
Now. the average  of  the  product  of  the  measurements  is
P(a. b) =       p(L) A(u. X)B(b. L) dZ,                          [12.7]
where  p(X)  is the probability  density  for the hidden variable. (Like any probability density, 
it is noniiegative,  and satisfies  the nonnalization  condition  J‘ p(X) fJX =   1, but  beyond  
this  we  make  no  assumptions  about  p(X);  different  hidden  variable theories  would  
presumably  deliver  quite  different  expressions  for  p.)  In  view  of Equation  12.6,  we can 
eliminate  B:


P(a. b) —  —       p(/) A(a. 7) A(b, 7) d7,

If  c is any other“  unit  vector,

P(a. b) —  P(a. c)      —               A(a. 7) A(b. 7)  — A(a, 7) A(c. 7)

Or, since   A(b. L)l-      1:

[12.8]



[12.91

P(a. b) —  P(a. c) =  —      p(X)[I  — A(b. L) A(c. L)  A(a. Z) A(b, X) dv.     [12.10a

But  it  follows  from  Equation  12.5  that  — 1       [A(a. L) A(b. L)]      +  l:  mofeover 
p(X)[l  — A(b, Z) A(c, Z)   > 0, so

P(a. b)  —  P(a. c)                         —  A(b. 7) A(c. Z)t d/.                  [12.1 l]






This  is  the  famous  Bell  inequality.  It  holds  for ‹rirr  local  hidden  variable  theory 
(subject only to the lninimal iequiremeiits  of Equations  12.5 and 12.6), for we have made no 
assumptions  whatever as to the nature or number of the hidden variable(s),

But it is easy to show  that the quantum  mechanical  prediction  (Equation  12.4) is incompatible  
with Bel1”s inequality.  For example, suppose all three vectors lie in


426          Chapter  12    A[tertuord









",45°
a        strates  quantum  violations  of Bell's inequality.


iiiechanics  says



which  is patently  inconsistent  with  Bell's  inequality:

0.707       1  — 0.707      0.293.


radical than its authors ilTlagined: If they are right, then not only is quantum niechan- iCS  
iI76'OPip/eie,  it  is  downright  ivron,g.  On  the  other  hand,  if  quantum  mechanics

Ein.stein considered  sn preposterous.  Moreover,  we are provided  with a very  simple experiment  
to  settle  the  issue  once  and  for  all.
Many  experiments  to  test  Bel1"s  inequality  were  performed  in  the  '60 s  and

concern us here (they  actually  used two-photon  atomic  transitions.  not pion decays). To 
exclude  the remote possibility  that  the positron  detector might  somehow  “sense”

after   the  photons  were  already  in  fiip•ht.  The  results  were  in  excellent  ag•reement 
with  the  predictions  of  quantum  mechanics,  and  clearly  lncompatible   with  Bell's 
inequality.
Ironically, the expei iinental confirmation  or quantum mechanics came as soine- thin=‘  of a shock 
 to the  scientific  community.  But  not  because  it  spelled  the  demise of  “realism’"—most  
physici.sts  had  long  since  adjusted  to  this  (and  for  those  who


7A.   Aspect.  P.  Granticr.  and  G.   Rtiq•er.  Phy'.‹. R‹•i’.       tI.  49.  9.1  ( 1982).  For 
 more  recent  experi-
ments  sec  G.  Wcil\s  e/ ctl..  Phys.  Rev.  L‹'ii.  81.  ñ0ñ9  ( 1998).

contains  son\c  secret  bi‹is  which  select.s  nut  :i  i\onrcprcsci\fativc  . ‹imylc,  thus  
di.stt›rting  the :ivcragc.  In
1989.  an  improved   version  ol’ Bell’.s  theorem   wits  proposed.   i ii  u'hich  a  .siit,ql‹• 
 itieasiireiit‹•itt  xul'fices
to  dislin   uish  bcl  vecn  II c   ‹]u‹ti\tun\   prediction   and  th:‹t   ‹›r any  local  
lii‹1den  vari:ible  tlicory,  Sce  D. Greonberger,  M.   Horne.  A.  Sliin«›ny.  :tnd  A.   
Zcilin3c•r.  Aiii.  J.   Plt;-.s.  58.   1.1.31   y 1990)  and  N.   David Merniin.  Am.  J.  
Ph;.s.  58.  731  ( I'7901.

Section  12.2:   Dell's  T/ieoreiri          427









ojector ”  ”   Bug  "  "  "  ”   " “            ”     "  "  ”  ”  "  "  ”  "  "  "  ”  ”


Screen

FIGURE 12.4:     The shadow of the bug moves across the screen  at a velocity r’  greater than c,  
provided  the screen  is far enough  away.

to  which  Bell's  theorem  does   not   apply⁹).  The  real  shock   was  the  demonstra- tion  
that  tiotui e  itsel[  is  [uiidninentall)!  iioiiloe al.  Nonlocality,   in  the  form  of  the 
instantaneous  collapse  of  the  wave  function  (and  for  that  matter  also  in  the  sym- 
metrization  requirement  for  identical  particles)  had  always  been  a  feature  of  the 
orthodox   interpretation,  but  before  Aspect's  experiment   it  was  possible  to  hope that  
quantum  nonlocality   was  somehow   a  nonphysical  artifact  of  the  fomialisin, with  no  
detectable  consequences.  That  hope  can  no  longer  be  sustained,  and  we arc  oongcu  to  
rccxannnc  uur  objcc tion  to  insiani‹incous  ‹inion-‹ii-‹i-uisiancc.
Why  me  physicists  so  squeamish  about  superluminal   influences?  After  all, there  are  many 
 things  that  travel  faster  than  light.  If  a  bug  flies  across  the  beam of  a  movie  
projector,  the  speed  of  its  shadow   is  proportional   to  the  distance  to the  screen;  in 
 principle,  that  distance  can  be  as  large  as  you  like,  and  hence  the shadow  can  move  
at  arbitrarily  high  velocity  (Figure  12.4).  However,  the  shadow does not carry  any  energ) 
 ; nor can it  transmit  a me.tsrtge  from one point  to another on  the  screen.  A  person  at  
point  X  cannot  t citise air; think  to licipyeii  at  point  Y   by rnanipulatinp•  the  passing 
 shadow.
On  the other  hand,  a ransom  influence  that  propagated  faster  than  light  would carry  
unacceptable  implications.  For according  to special relativity  there exist  iner- tial  frames  
in  which  such  a  sienal  nronaoates  hacks  ird  iii   fine —the  effect  nre- ceding  the 
cause—and  this  leads  to inescapable  logical  anomalies.  (You  could,  for example,  arrange  
to kill  your infant  grandfather.  Not  a good idea!) The question  is, are  the  superluminal  
influences  predicted  by  quantum  mechanics  and  detected  by

'It   is  a  curious  twist  of’ fate  that  the  EPR  paradox.  which  asswtied   locality  in  or 
dci  to  yrove realism.  led  finally  ro  the demise  of  loc‹iliiy  and  le1’i  the  issue  of  
realism  undecided—the  outcome  (as Mermin  put  it) Einstein  would  have  liked  lea.st.  Most  
physicists  today  consider  that  il’ they  can’t  have local   realism.  thel-e's  not  much  
point  in  rcali.sm  at  oll.  and  lor  thi.s  reason  nonlocal  hidden  variable theol res  
occupy  a  rathcl‘ peripheral  place.  Still.  some  authors—notably Bell  himself.  in  
S;›eakal›le  ‹retd Uitspeokohle   nt  9uciitnni  ñfe‹ficnic'.s   (Cambridge   University  Press.   
1967) —argue  that  .such   thcoi'ies ofifer  the  best  hope  of  bridging   the  conceptual   gap 
 between  the  mcasurcd  system  and  the  measul‘ing apparatus.  and  for  .supplying  an  
intelligible  mechanism  for  thc  ctillapse  ol’ the  wave  liinction.

428        Chapter  /.2    A[termord

Aspect  ‹  iiisal,  in this  sense,  or are they  somehow  ethereal  enough (like  the motion of  
the  shadow)  to escape  the philosophical  objection?
Well,  let's  consider  Bell's  experiment.  Does  the  nieasiirement  of  the electron 
iiifliieiice  the outcome  of  the positron  measurement?  Assuredly  it does —otherwise we cannot  
account  for  the correlation  of  the data.  But  does the measurement  of  the electron  cruise  
a  particular  outcome  foi‘  the  positron?  Not  in  any  ordinary  sense of  the  word.  There  
is  no  way  the  person  manning  the  electron  detector  could  use his  measurement  to  send  
n  signal  to  the  person  at  the  positron  detector,  since  he does  not  control  the  
outcome  of  his  own  measurement  (he  cannot  itiake  a  given electron  come  out  spin  up,  
any  more  than  the  person  at  X   can  af'fect  the  passing shadow  of  the  bug).  It  is  
true  that  he can  decide  whether  to ninke  ft  mea.smeitieiit ii nll, but  the positron  
monitor,  having  immediate  access  only  to data at  his end of

compiled  at the two ends, considered  separately, are completely  random. It is only when  we 
comynie  the two lists later that  we discover  the remarkable  correlations. In  another  
reference  frame  the  positron  measurements  occur  befoi e  the  electron measurements.  and  
yet  this  leads  to  no logical  paradox—the  observed  correlation is entirely syrrunetrical in 
its treatment, and it is a matter of indifference whether we say the observation  of  the electron  
influenced  the  measurement  of  the positron, or the other way  around. This is a wonderfully  
delicate  kind of  influence  whose only manifestation  is a subtle correlation  between  two lists 
of  otherwise  random  data.
We  are  led,  thell,  to distinguish  two  types  of  influence:  the  “causal”  variety, which 
produce  nctual changes in some physical  property of the receiver, detectable by  measurements  on 
 that  subsystem  alone.  and  an  “ethereal”  kind.  which  do  not transmit  energy  or  
infonnation,  and  for  which  the  only  evidence  is  a  correlation in  the  data  taken  on  
the  two  separate  subsystems—a  correlation  which  by  its

propagate  faster  than  light,  but  there  is  no  compelling  reason  why  ethereal  ones should 
 not. The influences associated  with the collapse of the wave function  are of the  latter  type, 
and  the fact  that  they  “travel”  faster  than  light  may  be surprising, but it is not, after 
all, catastrophic.1'


12.3  THE NO-CLONE THEOREM

Quantum  measureisients are  typically  destructive,  in  the  sense  that  they  alter  the

the  laboratory.  You  mip•ht  wonder  why  we  don't  just  make  a  bunch  of  identical copies  
(clones)  of  the  original  state,  and  measure  them,  leaving  the  system  itself

'An   enormous  alnount  has  been  written  about  Bell's  theorem.  My  favorite  is  an  
inspired  es‘say
by  David Merinin  in  Plt5 sics  Toda.s   (April  1985.  page  38).  An  extensive  bibliography  
will  be  found  in
L.  E.  Ballentinc.  Anti.  J.  Plt;•s.  S6. 785 (1987).




unscathed. It can't be done. Indeed, if you could build a cloning device (a “quantum Xerox  
machine”),  quantum  mechanics  would  be out  the  window.

the EPRB experiment.  Say  the message to be transmitted, from  the operator  of the positron  
detector  to  the  operator  of  the electron  detector,  is either  “yes”  or  “no.’

what  result she gets—all  that  matters  is  that she  makes  the measurement,  for  this means  
that the electron is now in the definite state     or     (never mind which). The

each  of  thein.  If  they  all  yield  the  same  answer  fnever  mind  which  answer).  we can  
be pretty sure that  the electron  i‹'ns  in fact  measured,  so the messap•e is “yes.” If  half  
ct  them  are spin  up,  and  half  spin  down,  then  the  electron  was  definitely

But you can 'r  make a quantum Xerox  machine, as Wootters, Zurek, and Dieks roved  in  1982      
Sche   atically   we want  the      ch ne  o  t    e as   nput  a  part cle in state |/)    (the 
one to  be copied),  plus a second  particle  in state | X)  (the  “blank sheet of  paper”), and 
spit  Out  rii o  partlcles  in  the state |/)    (original  plus copy):

[12.13]

Suppose  we  have  made a device  that successfully  clones  the state |J   ):

[12.14]


[12 1'i]

(IU)  and  |ge  )  might  be  spin  up  and  spin  down,  for example,  lf  the particle  is an 
electron).  So far, so good.  But  what  happens  when  we feed  in a linear combination
|/)        a |J    ) +   Q|/,}? Evidently  we  get ¹'


lt)l*)-+alti)lt1)+Blcs)lts).
which  is nnt at all  what  we wanted—what  we mounted  was
[12.16]







and  W. l4. Zurek.  Nature  299.  8t)2  (1982):  D.  Dieks.  Phd.s. L •tt.  A  92,  271

'This :msun1cs  that  the device tels  Ii'ii  ‹ii I»  r n  the sttitc |/). as it  must. since the  
tinlc-dcpcnJcnt
Schriidinger  equation  (which  presumably  p›ovcrns  tlic  process)  is  linear.


iptet              ter wor

You  can  make a  machine  to clone spin-up  electrons  and spin-down  electrons,  but it's going  
to fail for any  nontrivial  linear combinations.  It's as though  you  bought

coiiipletely  distorts  diagonals.

12.4  SCHRODINGER'S  CAT                                                                            
              

here  that  indeterminacy,  nonlocality,  the  collapse  of  the  wave  function,  and  all the  
attendant  conceptual  difficulties  arise.  Absent  measurement,  the  wave  func-

eouation,  and  quantum  mechanics  looks  like a rather ordinarv  field  theorv  (much simpler  
than  classical electrodynamics, for example,  since there  is  only  otte  field nstea    o      o 
      an          an     ts   a  s  n          t   st    e     z    e  roe  o   t  e measurement   
process  that  gives  quantum   mechanics  its  extraordinary   richness and  subtlety.  But  what, 
 exactly,  is  a  measurement?  What  makes  it  so  different from  other  physical  processes?ˡ³  
And  how  can  we  tell  when  a  measurement  has

Schrodinger   posed  the  essential  questlOn   most  starkly,  in  his  famous  cat
paradox:
A  cat  is  placed  in  a  steel  chamber,  together  with  the  following  hellish contraption.... 
 In  a  Geiger  counter  there  is  a  tiny  amount  of  radioactive substance,  so  tiny  that  
maybe  within  an  hour  one of  the  atoms  decays,  but equally probably none of them decays. If 
one decays then the counter triggers and via a relay activates a little hammer which  breaks a 
container of cyanide. If one  has left  this entire system  for an hour,  then one would say  the 
cat  is

wave  function  of  the entire  system  would  express  this  by  containing  equal parts of  the 
living and dead cat.
At  the end of  the  hour,  the  wave function  of  the cat  has  the schematic  form




'- There  is  a  school  of  tli‹iuglit   that   rejects  thi.s  distinction,   holding   that   
the  system   and   tlme measuring  apparatus  should  be described  by one great  big  wavc  
l'unction  which  itself evolves  according to  the  Schiiidinger  equation.  In  such  thcories  
there  is  no  collapse  of  the  wavc  iunction,  but  one  must typically  abandon  any  hope of 
describing  individual  events —quantum  mechanics  (in  this  view) applies

per
y       e  se         s          e       a   y  p
sys e                       e        p              p           e     ,
(1967).  or Lcsl‘ie E.  Ballentine,  Qiiantmtt  Mecluwics:  A Modem  Deiielopittent. 2nd ed.,  
World Scientific, Singapore  (1998).
'   E.  Schr’‹idinger, Nnttirsiii.z.c. 48, 52 ( 1935);  translation  by Josef‘ M.  Jauch,  
Fouudatioits  o(Qiiaii-
tieii  Mecltottic,t.  Addison-Wesley, Reading  ( 1968),  p.  185.




The cat is neither alive nor dead, but rather a linear combination of the two, until a
O C
your  observation  forces  the  cat  to  “take  a  stand”:  dead  or alive.  And  if  you  find him 
 to be dead,  then  it's really  Ann  who killed  him,  by looking  in  the window.
c  ro  i her  reg     e    t  is  a    patent  nonsense   al        t  in       ost  p  ys    s s
would  agree  with  him. There  is something  absurd  about  the very  idea of  a inacr  - s‹:oJ›ic 
 object  being  in  a  linear  combiliation  of  two  palpably  different  states.  An electron  
can  be in a linear combination  of spin  up and spin down, but a cat simply

with  the orthodox  interpretation of quantum  mechanics?
The  most  widely  accepted  answer  is that  the  triggering  of  the Geiger  counter

tin
cons i u es      e    ineasurelnen  ,
e  sense  o       e  s a is ica     n erpre a  on   no
the   intervention   of  a  human   observer   It   is  the  essence  of  a  measurement   that 
soine  inns rosc‘opic  system  is  affected  (the  Geiger  counter,  in  this  instance).  The 
easure    ent  occurs  at   he     o   ent  whe        e       croscopic  syste     (desc   bed  by

by  the laws of classical  mechaliics)  in such a way as to leave a permanent  record. The  
liiacroscopic  system  itself  is not  permitted  to occupy  a linear combination  of distinct 
states.'"
I would  not  pretend  that this is an entirely  satisfactory  resolulion,  but at least it avoids 
the stultifying solipsism of  Wigner and others, who persuaded  themselves that  it  is  the  
involvement  of  human  consciousne.ss that  constitutes  a  measurement in   n,iinntiim   
merhnnirs    Pnrt   nf   the   nrnh1ein   is   the   wnrrl   “nen«iirenient”  if<elf which 
certainly  carries  a suggestion  of  human  participation. Heisenberg  proposed the word   event   
 which     ight   e pre erable  Bu   I     afra d      easure   en         o

terminology  can  completely  exorcise  this  mysterious  ghost.

12.5  THE QUANTUM  ZENO PARADOX

whole  bizarre  story.  It  was  introduced  on  purely  theoretical  p•rounds,  to  account for 
the fact  that an immediately  i epeated  measurement  reproduces  the same value. But surely such 
a radical postulate must carry directly observable consequences.  In

*Ol’ ec›urse.  in  .some  ultimate  :sense  the  macroscopic   system  is  itself   described  by  
the  law's  ofi quantum  mechanics.  But  wave  functions.  in  the  first  in.stalicc.  describe  
individual  elementary  pilrticlcs: the  wave  Auction  elf’  a  macroscopic  object   would  be  
:i  mcinsu-ously  corrlplicated  composite.  built  out of  all  the  wave  functions  ol’  its  10 
     constituent  particles.  Presuiiiably   soincwhere  in  the  .statistics  of
large  numbers  macroscopic   linear  combinations   become  extremely   iiriprobablc.   Indeed,   
it‘  you  ii•ere
able  .somehow   to  get  a  damped  pendulum  (say)  into  a  linear  combifltltlotl  Of  
lTliICl‘OSCO   itiallJ  distiflct quantum  states.  it  iv‹iuld.  in  a  tiny  tract ion  o1  the  
dalnping  time,  l'cvcrt  to  an  ordinary  classical  state. This  phenomenon  is  called  
decoherence.  See.  for  example.  R.  Omiies,  Tlte  fitter prr,tatioii  o)’ Quatttiitn 
Mecltaiii‹’.s  (Princeton.  1994).  Chapter  7.


erfcOF

You  can  make a machine  to clone spin-up electrons  and spln-down  electrons,  but it's going  to 
fail for any  nontrivial  linear combinations.  It's as though  you  bought

completely  dlstorts  diagonals.

12.4  SCHRODINGER'S CAT                                                                             
       

here  that  indeterminacy,  nonlocallty,  the  collapse  of  the  wave  function,  and  all the  
attendant  conceptual  difficulties  arise.  Absent  measurement,  the  wave  func-

eouation,  and  quantum  mechanics  looks  like a  rather  ordinary  field  theory  (much simpler  
than classical  electrodynamics,  for exmnple,  since  there  is only  one  field nstea    o        
        an          an    its   a  s     n       t  is     e     za   e  roe  o   t  e measurement  
 process  that  gives  quantum  mechanics  its  extraordinary   richness and  subtlety.  But  what, 
 exactly,  is  a  measurement?  What  makes  it  so  dlfferent from  other  physical  processes?ˡ-’ 
And  how  can  we  tell  when  a measurement  has

Schriidinger   posed   the  essential  question   most   starkly,   in  his  famous   cat 
paradox:'4
A  cat  is  placed  in  a  steel  chamber,  together  with  the  following   hellish 
contraption....  In  a  Geiger  counter  there  is  a  tiny  amount  of  radioactive substance,  so 
 tiny  that  maybe  within  an  hour one  of  the atoms  decays,  but equally probably none of them 
decays. If one decays then the counter triggers and via a relay activates a little hammer which 
breaks a container of cyanide. If one has left  this entire system  for an  hour,  then one would  
say  the cat  lS

wave  function  of  the entire  system  would  express  this  by  containing  equal parts of  the 
living and dead cat.
At  the end of  the  hour,  the wave function  of  the cat  has  the schematic  form




'   Ther c   is  a  school   of’  thought   that   reject.s   this  distinction,   holding   that   
tlme  system   and   the measuring  apparatus  should  be described  by  one great  big  wave  
lunction  which  itsell’ evolves  according to  the  Sclâriidinger  equation.  In  such  thcories  
there  is  no  collapse  of  the  wave function.  but  one  must typically  abandon  any  hope of’ 
describing  individual  events —quantum  mechanics (in  this  view) applies
y      e  se         s          e     ca   y  p    p         sys e   s     ee         ex      p     
         p           e
(1967),  or Leslie E. Ballentine,  Qiuuittini  Mecltatiics:  A Mndeizt  Dei›elapiiieitt, 2nd ed., 
World  Scientific, Singaporc  (1998).
"E.    Schrtiding‹n-, Nntui›i i.cs.  48. 52 (1935);  translation  by Josef’ M.  Jauch.  
Fruutdnlioiis  o,p Qiuui-
ii,ini  Mrcliaiiic.  ,  Addison-Wesley. Reading  ( 1968),  p.  185.




The cat  is neither alive nor dead,  but  rather a linear combination  of the  two, until  a

your  observation  forces  the  cat  to  “take  a  stand”:  dead  or  alive.  And  if  you  find 
him  to  be dead,  then  it's really  ;!ou  who killed  him,  by  looking  in  the  window.
spc  rii  inger  regar  e    t             paatent   nonsense    an        t    n        ost  p  ys 
cists
would  agree  with  hint.  There is something  absurd  about  the  very  idea of a ri‹icrc›- 
s‹’opie'  object  being  in  a  linear  combination  of  two  palpably  different  states.  An 
electron  can  be in a linear combination  of spin up and spin down,  but  a cat  simply

with  the orthodox  interpretation of quantum  mechanics?
The  most  widely  accepted  answer  is  that  the  triggering  of  the Geiger counter co  s    u 
es     e       easure    en        n     e   ense  o       e  s a  s  ca    n erpre a lon   no the  
 intervention   of  a   human   ohserver    11   is   the  essence  of   a   measurement   that 
some  macroscopic  system  is  affected  (the  Geiger  counter,  ln  thls  instance).  The
measure    ent  occures  at  the  1   o              hen  thne      croscop c  syste     (descrtbed 
   y

by  the  laws  of classical  mechanics)  in such  a  way  as to  leave a permanent  record. The  
macroscopic  system  itself  is  not  permitted  to occupy  a  linear combination  of distinct  
states.l"
I  would  not  pretend  that  this  is an entirelY  satisfactory  resolution,  but  at  least it  
avoids  the stultifying  solipsism  of Wigner and others,  who persuaded  themselves that  it  is  
the  involvement  of  human  consciousness  that  constitutes  a  measurement in   n,iiantiiiaa   
mechanics    Part   nf   the  pi nhlem   is  the   wnrd   “me.asiireiuent”   itsel f which  
certainly  carries  a  suggestion  of  human  participation.  Heisenberg  proposed

bye
the  word    e  ent     which     igh
preferable   But  I       a  ra d   n easure nent     s so

terlninology  can completely  exorci.se  this mysterious  ghost.

12.5  THE QUANTUM ZENO PARADOX

whole  bizarre  story.  It  was  introduced  on  pure1v  theoretical  p•rounds,  to  account for 
the fact that an immediately  repeated  measurement  reproduces  the same  value. But surely such a 
radlcal  postulate  must carry directly observable consequences. In

1977 Misia  and  Sudarshan l’  proposed  what  they called  the quantum  Zeno effect as  a  
dramatic  experlmeliial   demonstration   of  the  collapse  of  the  wave  function. Their  idea  
was  to  take  an  unstable  system  (an  atom  in  an  excited  state,  say),  and Stlbject  it  
to repeated  liieasureiiients. Each observatiOli  Collapses  the  wave  function, resetting  the 
clock. and it is possible by  this means to delay  indefinitely  the expected transition  to  the  
lower  state.17
Speclfically.  suppose  a  system  starts  out  in  the  excited  state       ,  which  has a  
natural  lifetime   T   for  transition   to  the  ground  state  tl  .  Ordinarily,  for  ilmes 
substantially   less  than  r,   the  probability  of  a  transition   is  proportional   to  f   
(see Eouation  9.42):  11a  fact.  since  the  tralisltion  rate  is  1 /r.

[l 2,191

If  we  make  a  measurelnent  aftel  a  tllne  r, then,  the  orobabllity  that  the  svstein  lS 
still  in  the  up Rei  state  is


Suppose  we  do  filJd  it  to  be  ln  the  upper  state.  In  that  case  the  wave  function 
collapses  back  to  J„    and  the  process  starts  all  over  again.  If  we  make  a .second 
measurement,  at  2r,  the  probablllty  that  the  system  is .iii//  in  the  upper  state  is 
evidently

[12.21)
F                          T

which 1s  the same as lt  WoUld  have been  had we never iiiade the first  measurement attr  T   sp 
 s whaipJi    wou dq ia   ely   x  ect   lf  tp werepthe  wh  lepstoryqthe     would

quantum  Zeno effect.
However, for e.vlremel y  short  times. the  probability  of  a transition  is nor  pro- ponlonal  
to i,  but  rather  to i-  (see Equation  9..39):'

[12.22)
In  this case the  probability  that  the system  is stlll  in  the  upper state after  the  two
measurements  1s
(1     ni')        l  — 2ni'.                                    [12.23]




wulchcd  g‹›t  ne  cr  bui1s,“  sn  il  is sumctilncs  c:›I1cd  the  watched  pot  phenomenon.
''In the aF§UTTlCI1  )C.}dlIlg lo line‹ir time Jcpcndcncc. we assunicd that thc funcliun 
sin'(f2r/*)/ f2' in Equ:itinn  9..1? w:i.s a sham   pikc. However’.  the \i’idiIi  ot’ the   
.spike" is ul* ni°dci  Auv -   4s//. and lor e.\liemel;’  shurt  i  this  appruximatic›n  fails,  
and  the integi al  becomes  (i'l4)  /‘ /n(‹u)z/w.




whereas  if  we had  never  made the first  lneasurement  it  wOuld  have  been


Evidently  our observation  of  the system after time i decreased  the net  probability Indeed,  if 
 we  examine  the  system  at  ii  regular  intervals,  from  i  =   0  out
to  i   =   T   (that  is,  we  make  measurements  at  T/n, 2f/ii,  3T/n. ...  , T),  the


I  -   a(T/it)                                                           [12.25

which  goes  to  l  in  the  limit  ii  —›  on:  A  coiitinuotisl y  observed  unstable  system

that the collapse of the wave function is fallacious. However, their  argument  hinges on a rather 
loose interpretation of  what constitutes  “observation.” If  the track of a

closed. for such particles certalnly do decay (in fact, their lifetime is not measurably extended  
by the presence of the detector).  But such a particle is only  interiiiittently lnteracting  with  
the  atoms  in  the  chamber,  and  for  the  quantum  Zeno  effect  to

catch  the system  in  the i-  regime.
As it  turns out, the experiment  is impractical  for spontaneous  transitions,  but it can be done 
using induced  transitions, and the results are in excellent  agreement with  the  theoretical  
predictions.'⁹  Unfortunately,  this  experiment  1s  not  as  com- pelling a confirmation  of the 
collapse of the wave function  as its designers  hoped: the observed  effect  can  be accounted  
for  in  other  ways.  ⁰


In  this  book     have  tried  to  tell  a  consistent  and  coherent  story:  The  wave function  
(T) represents  the state of a particle (or system): particles  do not  in gen- era   possess  spec 
  c    yna    ca   proper  es   posl  Ol       o   en u      ene qy   angu

a  particular  value  in  any  given  experiment  is deternñned  by  the  statistical  inter- 
pretation  of  T; upOli  measurelnent  the wave function  collapses, so that  an  imlne-

posslble interpretations—nolilocal hidden varlable theories, the “iiiany worlds” pic- ture,  
“consistent  histories,”  ensemble  liioilels,  and  others—but  I  believe  this one


"L.     E. Ballentinc.  F‹›tiit‹l.  Plt; s. 20,  1329 ( 1990): T. Pctrosky.  S. Tasaki.  and I.  
Prigogine.  Plt;.:.
Lett.  A  151.  109  (1990).


434          Chapter 12    A[tertuord

is  concentuallv  the  .him  le.st,  and  certainly  it  ix  the one  xhared  by  inoxt  phyxicistx 
today.-1 It  has  stood  the  test  of  time,  and  emerged  unscathed  from  every  exper- imental 
 challenge.  But  I  cannot  believe  this  is  the  end  of'  the  story;  at  the  very
1r•sc I,   \1/r•  h‘t1/r•  tel  1r’h   tn   1r•n red   n hn›lt   the   nsti \ z•r•  n  F  rt1r•s e› 
i rr•rrir•nt   snrl   thr•  rrir•r'h sn  i errs
of collapse.  And it is entirely  possible that future generations  will look back, from the  
vantage  point of a iiiore sophisticated  theory,  and  wonder how  we could  have been so 
gullible,












APPENDIX

















those  we  encounter  in  first-year  physlcs.  The  generalization  is  in  two  directions:
(1) We allow the scalars to be complex’  numbers, and (2) we do not restrict ourselves to three 
dimensions.


A.1  VECTORS


A  vector  space consists of  a set of  vectors (|‹r),  |Q),  |y), .   . ).  together  with a set 
of  scalars  («,  b,  c,   ...   ), l   which  is  closed'  under  two  operations:  vector  
addition and  scalar  multiplication.
•   Vector  Addition
The “sum” of  any  two vectors  is another  vector:

[A.l J




Ft›r  uur  purposes.  the sc:tltu s  will  bc  ui'dinaiy  cuiTiplcx  nun1hci'.s.  M:ill en 
‹\licianr  can  tcll  yuu
: bt›ut  vcctoi’ syaccs  ever  murc  cxntic  liclds.  but  such  objects  play  nu  rule  in  
quantum  iticclianics.  Nctc III:il   c     /f     )x            ni‘«  Hill   (‹1i ‹Min  II icy)   
ntlnJhrr5    I hry      are     f7/Hx7•Y   ( 1nho.Is) —    Wharlir  "   I(›r  in   Innc:r•    ccl 
“F4MA-fiGL.”  nr  wljatcvcr  yuu  care ie  use  It›  idcntif}  tlic  vecl‹›r  in  qucsticn.
‘Thai  is  to  say.  ilicse•  operations  arc  alw‹iy.s  well-defined,  :ind  will  ncvCf  fiitfry  
you  outside  the vector  .space.

435


ppeii            frie‹ir     ge

and associative:



There exists a zero (or null)  vector,³ |0), with  the property  that


for every  vector |a). And  for every  vector |a)  there is an associated  inverse vector  (| — 
a)),   such  that





sic
•  Scalar  Multiplicahon
e   pro  uct    o   any

w  t    a  y  vector  1s      o   er    ector

a|o)      |y).



[A.6J
Scalar  multlplication is distributive  with  respect  to  vector  addition:

[A.7]


(• + !•     ) — •!    ) + b                            [A.ml
It is also associative  with  respect  to the ordinary  multiplication of scalars:


n(b\a   )      (rib)\a).
Multiplication  by  the scalars  0 and  1  has  the effect  you  would  expect:
[A.9)

[A.10]

Evidently  | — a)        (—1)|a)  (which  we  write  more  simply  as

There's  a  lot  less  here  than meets  the  eye—all  I  have  done  is  to  write down in 
abstract  language  the familiar  rules  for manipulating  vectors.  The  virtue of such

behavior of oidinary  vectors to other systems that happeli to share the salne formal properties.

s          y                               u     n      n                                     n     
      c       w       u                   n ng bracket:  |0)  —+  0.
This  is funny  nulatiun.  since a  is  nut  a  number.  I'm  simply  adopting  lhc  nance  
"—C/ilrlic"  fnr Il1r  in verse  ref  ills.  ve.elm   wh‹›sr   nnmc  is  ”C'h.\rlie  ”  M‹1re.  
n‹\lIii:iI   trrmin‹JI‹1oy   wi II  «IiPPcal   ils«1f   in  .z monlcnf.




A  linear  combination  of  the  vectors  |a),  |$),  |y),  ...  ,  is an  expression  of

*•l°) + b!B) + •!r) + -                                 [A.11]
A  vect          )   is  said    o    e  linear  y    ndependent   of      e  set       )        )  
      )
if  it  cannot  be  written  as  a  linear  combination  of  them.  (For  example,  in  three 
dimenslons  the  unit  vector  k  is  linearly   independent  of  i  and  y,  but  any  vector Ili  
the .ry  plane  is  linearly  dependent   on  i  and   /.) By  extension,  a  set  of  vectors

collection  of  vectors  is  sald  to scan  the space  if  enei‘›   vector  can  be  written  as a  
linear  combination  of  the  members  of  this  set.⁵  A  set  of  linens 1y independent
cec ore aspans t  e space is            a fas s       e nun   er o    ectors   n any    a

dimension  (ii) is,finite.
With  respect  to a  prescribed  basis

[A.12]



eii

is  uniquely  represented  by  the (ordered)  ii-tuple of  its components:
A.13


[A.14]

It  ix often easier  to work  with  the coinnonents  than  with the abxtract  vectors  them- 
selves.  To add  vectors,  you  add  thelr corresponding  components:

[A.15]

to n u1 lp y   y a scal     you     ult ply each co   ponent

[A.16]

the  null  vectoi  is i epresented  by a string  of zeroes:


|0) +› (0,0.... .0):

and  the components  of the iliverse  vector  have  thelr sip•ns  reversed:
[A.17]


[A.18]


"A  scl  ol" vccturs  that  xy‹ins  tllc space  is :tl.su  c:lIed  complete.  th‹›ugh  I  
personally  rc.scrvc  that H'crtl  fur  the  infinite-dinlcnsion il  case. w]1crc .subtlc  
que.sliuns  ‹Jf  cunvcrecncc  may  ari.sc.


438          Appendix    Litiear  Algehi a

The  only  dis advantage  of  working  with  components  is  that  you  have  to  commit yourself  
to a particular  basis.  ancl  the  same  inanlpulations  will  look  very  different to SOliieone  
working  lJ  il different  basis.

Problem  A.1  Consider  the  ordiliary  vectors  in  3  dimensions  (run  +   a      -F a-k),
with complex  components.

what  is  its  dimelisiOlJ;  if  not,  why  not?
(b)   What  about  the  subset  of  all  vectors  whose  r  coiiiponent  is  1? Hirer.’   Would the 
suin  o1  two  such  vectors  be  in  the subset?  How  about  the null  vector?
(c)   What  about  the  subset  of  vectors  whose  components  are all equal'




min
sProblem  A.2  Consider   the  collection   of  all  polylJOmials  (with  complex   coeffi- cients  
 o     eg  ee   ess  t
(a)   Does  this  sei  constitute  a  vector  space  (with  the  polynomials  as  “vectOlS”)?

which  of  the  devil  ing  properties  does  it  lack?
/h)   What  i\”  we  require  that  lhe  gnlynninials  he  ri›aii   ft  nrtinns

.r N    1) be  I ‘?
(d)   What  if  we  require  that  the polynomials  have  the  value 0 at  .i  =   1?
(e)   What  if  we  require  that  the  polynomials  have  the  value  1  at  .r =   0?

Problem  A.3  Prove  that  the COliiponents  of  a  vector  with  respect  to a p•iven  basis are  
iiiiir/lie.




In three diiiiensiolis  we encounter two kinds of vector products:  the dot pioduct  and the cross 
product, The latter' does not generallze  in any natural  way  to ii-dliiielisional vector  spaces, 
 but  the  former  One.i —in  this  context  lt  is  usually  called  the  inner yiroriuct.   The  
inner  product   of   twn  vectnrs  (|rr)   and  |/))  is  a  complex   nuiiiber, which  we  write  
as  {m|Q),  with  the  folloWilig  properties:




[A.19]
[A.20]
[A.21]


familiar  behavior  of  dot  products.  A  vector space  with  an inner  product 1s  called an 
inner product space.
Because  the inner  product  of any  vector  wilh  itself  is a  nonnegative  number


[A.22]

it  eeneralizes  the notion of “len•pth.”  A unit vector  (one whose  norln  is  I) is said to be 
normalized  (the word should  really  be “normal,”  but I guess that sounds too anthropomorphic). 
Two vectors  whose lnner product  is zero are called orthogonal

normalized  vectors,
[A.23]

is called  an orthonormal  set.  It  is always  possible (see Problem  A.4),  and  almost always  
convenient,  to choose  an ortlionoi innl basis ’,  in that  case  the inner product of  two  
vectors  can  be  written  very  neatly  ln  terms  Of  their components:

[A.24]


the  noun (squared)  becomes

l•la) =  l«1l' +  l•zl' +      +  l•›‹1'.
and  the components  themselves  are


[A.25)


[A.261

(These  results generalize the familiar formulas a - by =   n,fi, + o;.fi . +  a-li-, |a|² = oy -F 
a   + oJ,  and  n,  =  /   a,  n   =   y-    a, o-  =  k-    a,  for  the  three-dimensional 
orthonormal  basis  /,  y,  k.)  From  now  on  we  shall  a/n'oys  work  in  ollhonormal bases,  
unless it  is explicitly  indicated  otherwlse.

between two vectors. In ordinary vector analysis cos 8 =  (a  b)/|a||b|. But because the  inner  
product  is  ln  general  a complex  number,  the  analogous  formula  (in  an


pen            mear     ge

arbitrary  inner  product  space)  does  not  define a (real)  angle 8.  Nevertheless,  it  is 
still  true that  the absolute  valite  of this quantlty  is a  number  no greater than 1.

[A.27]
(This  important  result  is known as  the Schwarz  inequality;  the  proof  is given  in Problem  
A.S.)  So  you  can,  if  you  like,  define  the  aligle  between  |a)  and  |$)  by the forlnula
[A.28)



orthonormal.  The Gram-Schmidt  procedure  is a systematic  ritual  for generating from  it an 
orthonormal  basis (|cl).  e   .... . |e„)). It goes like this:
(i)   Normalize  the  first  basis  vector (divide  by  its  norm):

||el II
(ii)  Find  the projection  of the second  vector along the first, and subtract  li Off:


s   ector 1s  or   o  o  a   to          1 Ol    a    e   t  to •et   e2
(iii)  Subtract  from  ez)  its projections  along   e  ) and  |e}):
es) — (e  l«3)|e  ) —   e2   e3) e   .
This is orthogonal  to  e  )  and   e   : normallze it to p•et  e   . And so on. se  t        rain- 
           t  proce  ure  to  ort  onorma ize  t       -space    asis   e

Problem A.5  Prove  the  Schwarz  ine  ualit          nation A.27).  firm:  Let  | y)   =


em                    e ang     in    e sense o     qua ion             eiween    e vec ors
|a)      ( 1 -I- i) i  -1- (I)   y -1- {i)k  and  |$) = (4 — i1i +  (01,/ -l- (2 — 2i)k.

Problem A.7  Prove the triangle  inequality:  || (|a) -l- |Q)) ||  <  ||a || -l- ||Q ||.


A.3  MATRICES
Sectioii  A.3.  Matrices         441
Suppose you take every vector (in 3-space) and multiply  it by 17. or you rotate every sectors 
byg39   aboutp  hey   ax      orgyou   efle  t      ery  vector  inpthe        pl  ne—th  se

each  vector  in  a  vector  space  and  “transforms'  it  into  some  other  vector  flat  —+
|e') =  T  a)), subject  to the condition  that  the operation  be liite‹ii  .
[A.29]
for any  vectors  |a).  |Q)  and  any scalars  ri, ñ.
If  you  know  what  a  particular  linear  transformation  does  to  a  set  of  l›asis
vectors,  you  can easily  hgure out  what  it does  to our  vector.  For suppose  that





T |e„)         Tl» |e   ) -|- T›,   |c»)  +- -      +   T,    |e   ).
or,  more  compactly,



If  |a)  is an  arbitrary  vector,

[A.31]

then



j= 1                               j==1  i-   1                           i=l         j=  1

H  V ltlCH HQ    I      t‹lKC.s   ‹1   VAT tOl     W I tfl     L OlI1]3OIJC IN IS   If l •  ff°   
....  ,flit    llJ t(3   d    VCB ION   W I Ifl
coinponelitS7

[A.33]


"In  this chapter  1’11  use  a  hat  (‘)   to  denote  line:ir  transl'ormations:  this  is  not  
inconsistent   u'ith my  convention  in  the  text  (putting  h:its  on operators).  for  f.is we 
shall  see) qu:intuni  operators  nre  lineai transformations.
Ixulicc  Inc rcvcrsai  ul inaiccs  oclwccn  uqualiuns A.a‹s ana  a.Jñ.  i ills is net ci 
lypugrapnicai cner.  Another  way ul” yutfing  il (switching  /  in     j   ill Equation  A.30)  is 
tI1itt  it  thc  r‹›/ii/›r»i‹'ii/.   transt'urm I 'ith  7/;.  the  l›n.»i.   vcctors  transform  
with  '”i,'

442          Appendix     Litieor  Algebra

Thus  the ii'  elements  T; j  uniquely  characterize  the linear  transformation T  (with respect  
to  a  given  basis),  just  as  the  ii  components  a,  unlquely  characterize  the vectur  |a)  
(with respect  to the same basis):

[A.34]

If  the basis  is orthonormal,  lt  follows from  Equation  A.30 that



It 1s convenient  to display  these complex  numbers  in the fonn of  a  matrix:


Tel      r22

T›+l
The study of linear transformations reduces then to the theory of matrices. The som of  two linear 
transformations (S + T)  is defined  in the natural  way:

[A.37]

this   matches   the  usual   rule   for   adding   matrices   (you   add   their  corresponding 
elements):
U =  S  +  T        U; j     S;; -F T; j.                           [A.38]

The  product  of  two  linear  transformations  t ST)  is  the  net  effect  of  perfomiing them  
in succession—first T,  then  S.

S(T  a  ) ——  ST  a   .                 [A.39]

in







Evidently

j——1                   j=   l            k=1                       1=  1      y=  1                 
             1-    l





"I’ 11  use  boldlñcc  capital  letter's,  saris  seril’,  to denote  square“ matrices.




This  is  the  standard  rule  for  matrix  multiplication—to  find  the  ilth  element  of the  
product  ST,  you  look  at  the  ith  row  of  S,   and  the  kth  coluiiin  of  T,  multi-

rerffIHgu/ar  matrices,  as  long  as  the  number  of  columns  in  the  first  matches  the 
number of  rows in the second.  In particular,  if  we write the o-tuple of components



[A.41]


the  transformation  rule  (Equation  A.33) can  be expressed  as a matrix  product:


Now some  matrix  tenninology:

set  of  elements,  but  with  rows  and  columns  interchanged.  In  particular,  the transpose  
of  a c'olunui  matrix  is a row matrix:
â = (‹ii    ‹z           c„) .                          [A.43]
FOr a  sqwfiie  matrix  taking  the  transpose  amounts  to  reflecting  in  the  main
diagonal  (upper  left  to lower  right):


[A.44]


A (square)  matrix  is symmetric  if it  is equal  to its transpose;  it  is antisym- metric  if  
this operation  reverses the sign:


•  The  (complex)  conjugate  of  a  matrix  (which  we  denote,  as  usual,  with  an




[A.46]




I" II  usc  ht›ldfacc  luwci c‹Jsc  letters.  .eans  scrif.  for  rcw  and  culumn  nlatlccs.


444          Appetldix    Littear  Algehrn

A  matrix  is  real  if  all  its  elements  are  real,  and  imaginary  if  they  are  all 
imaginary:
real : T" =  T;     imaginary : T‘ =  —T.                    [A.47)
•   The  hermitian  conjugate  (or  adjoint)  of  a  lnatrix  (indicated  by  a  dagger,





[A.48]


conjugate;  if  hermitian  conjugatlon  lntroduces  a  minus  sign,  the  matrix  is
skew hermitian  (or anti-hermitian).
hermitian : T† =  T:     skew  hermitian : T† =  —T.           [A.49]

inal  basis—Equation  A.24),  can  be written  very  neatly  as a  matrix  product:
(a |g)      a†b.                                         [A.50]
Notice  that each of  the  flu ce operations  defined  in this paragraph.  if applled  twice,
returns  you  to  the original  ilJalFiX.
Matrix  niultipliciiiion  is  not,  in  general,  cominutative  (ST        TS):  the  differ -
eiice  between  the  two  orderings  is  called  the  commutator:''
S.  TJ -   ST  — TS.                                           [A.5 l]
The  transpose  of  a  pioduct  is  the  product  of  the  transposes  in  i evc•i se order  .
(ST) =  TS,                                                  [A.52]
(see  Problem  A.11 ).  and  the  same  goes  for hermitian  conjugates:
(ST)’ — T'S'.                                                 [A.53]
The unit matrix (representing  a linear transformation that carries ever y vector into itself)  
consists  of  ones on  the  main  dlagonal,  and  zeroes  everywhere  else:


[A.54]



''The comniut.itor  eerily  unites  men.sc  for  .iqiinr‹•  matrices.  ol’ course:  for  
rectangular  matrices  the
tu o or dei ings  wouldn't  even  be the same sixe.




In  other  words,


The  inverse  of  a (square)  matrix  (written  T*  ' ) 1s  defined  in  the obvious  way: l ’

T*'T = T T° ˡ  =  1.                                      [A.56]

A  matrix  has an  inverse  if  and only  if  its determinant'-  is nonzero;  ln  fact,

To'      det Tc,                                            [A.57]
where  G  is  the  matrix  of  cofactors  (the  cofactor  ofi element  T; j  is  (—1) “     times 
the determinant  ot  the  submatrix  obtained  front  T  by  erasinp•  the  ith  row  and  the
/th  column).  A  matnx  that  has no inverse  is said  to  be singular.  The  lnverse of  a 
product  (assuming  it  exists)  is  the product  of  the inverses  ifi  ie›!ei se or der:


(ST)*1 =  T*1 S*  1.


unitary  : U'   =   U*'.
[A.58]



[A.59)


orthonormal  set, and so too do its rows (see Problem  A.12). Linear transformations represented  
by  unitary  matrices  preserve  inner products,  since (Equation  A.50)

(     |§’)      a”b’      (Ua)†(Ub)      a  U'Ub — a'b         (   |g)                 [A.60)





2    0
2         0



' ' Note  that   the  lett  inverse   is  equal   to  the  fight   inverse.   l'oi‘  if  AT  =   1  
 and  TB  =   1.   then ti    ying     e secon    on                           an     nvo    rig    
ie    rst   we  get
' -T  :hsunze  yuu  know  huw  In eva]ui ie deterinin:int.s.  It* n‹›l.  sec  M.   Buas.  
M‹itliei›intical Metli‹›‹ls
in tltv  Phj'sicnl  Sc-ivnc ve, 2nd  ed. (John  Wiley.  New  Yoi k,  l9b3),  Section  3.3.
'In   a  reef   vector  space  (that  is,  one  in  which  ihe  scalal s  are  real)  ihe  
hermitian  conjugate  is the  same  as  the  transpose.  and  a  unitiltJ  fflilfldX  is  
orthogonal:  O   —  O*    ' .  For  exiiniplc.  rotations  in ordinary  3-space  are  represented  
by  orthogoniil  ln‹itriccs.

446          Appendix    Linear  Algebra

compute:  (a)  A +  B,  (b)  AB,  (c)  tA,Bt,  (d)  A,  (e)  A*,  (I)  A†,  (g)  det(B),  and
(h)   D  !   .   Check  that  DD  !         l.  Uoes  A have  an  inverse’/


sProblem A.9  Using   the   square   matrices   in   Problem  A.8,   and   the   column matrices

a =     2i          b =     (1 — i)
2                         0

find:  (a) Aa,  (b) a'b, (c) âBb,  (d) abT.

Problem A.10  By explicit  construction  of the matrices in question, show that any matrix  T can 
be written
(a)   as the sum of  a symmetric  matrix S  and  an antisymmetric  matrix  A;
(b)   as the sum of  a real  matrix  R  and  an imaginary  matrix  M;
(c)   as the sum of a hermitian  matrix  H and  a skew-hermitian matrix  K.

sProblem A.11  Prove  Equations  A.52,  A.53, and  A.58. Show  that  the  nroduct  of two unitary  
matrices  is unitary. Under  what conditions  is the  product  of  two her- mitian  matrices  
hermitian?  Is the sum of two unitary  matrices necessarily  unitary'?
I    the    ‹»  m   rif  ten    he rrn ii ian  matrir e<  her-mitinn


Problem  A.12  Show   that   the  rows  and  columns  of  a  unitarv   matrix  constitute 
orthonormal  sets.

Problem  A.13  Noting  that  det(T)  =   det(T),  show  that  the  determinant  of  a her- lltian 
matrix  is real,  tne deterimnant  of  a unitary  matrix  nas modulus  1  (nence  tfie name),  and  
the  detenninant  of  an  orthogonal  matrix  is either  +  1  or  — 1.



A.4  CHANGING BASES

The components  of a vector depend, of course, on your (arbitrary)  choice of  basis, and  so  do  
the  elements  of  the  matrix  representing  a  linear  transformation.  We might  inquire  how  
these  numbers  change  when  we  switch  to  a  different  basis.


Section  A.4:  Ch itiging  Bases         447
The old  basis  vectors,  \e;    are—like  n//  vectors—linear combinations  of  the  new ones,    
f;).
eI)  =  5111./1+)  S*-l1/›) + -    -I— S„ | {g),





Ifor some set of  complex  numbers  Si;), or, more conipactly,

|e j)  ——                                                                               [A.61]

This  is  itself   a  linear  transformation  (compare  Equation  A.30),1‘   and  we  know 
immediately  how  the  components  transform:

[A.62]



(where  the superscript  indicates  the basis). In  matrix  form
a‘   —— Sa".


[A.63)

What  about  the  matrix  representing  a  linear  transfonnation  F—how  is  ii
modified  by a change of  basis? Well, in  the old  basis  we had  (Equation  A.42)
a”  =  T"a".
and  Equation  A.63—multiplying both  sides  by S   ' —entai1s'⁵ a   = S*' a   , so




en
T      ST“S"I.

[A.64)

n  genera     wo ma  ices                     are  sai         e sim  ar  i
some fnnnsingtilar) matrix S   What we have just fnMncl  is  that rnnrri‹ e.s  rr'pi esriitiiir

'"Notice.  however,  the  radic‹illy  dil‘lercnt  perspective:  ln  this case  we’re  talking  
about  one and the  same  i’ectc›i-,  referred  to  two  completely  dil'lércnt  bn.se.v.  whereas  
before  we  were  thinking  of‘ a completely  ‹ltffvi-riit  vector,  referred  to the smiic•  
basis.
'"Note  that  S*  '  certainly  exists—if  S  were  singular’.  the  | J,)’s  would  not  span  the 
space. so they  wouldn't  constitute  a  basis,


en,            itfe ir     ge

the snine lineai  ti-niisfoi-innti‹ ti, noir/i  res Decl tO difeieiit  ba.ses,   me siitiil ii . 
Inciden- tally,  if  the  first  basis  is orthonormal,  the  second  will  also  be  orthonormal  
if  and

orthonormal  bases,  we are  interested  mainly  in  iiiiirarv  similarity  transformations.
While  the  elemeiit.s  of  the  matrix  representing  a  given  linear  transformation

are  unchanged:  the determinant  and  the  trace.  For  the determinant  of  a product  is the  
product  of  the determinants,  and  hence


And  the  trace,  which  is the  si,un of the dia,qoiicil  elemeiits,








Tr(T/ Th)      Tr(T2T/),
(for  any  two  matrices  T   and  T2). sO

Tr(T   )      Tr(ST"S"’ )      Tr(TLS"  S)      Tr(T").
[A.67)


[A.681

Problem A.14  Using  the  standard  basis (i.  y. k) for  vectors  in  three  dimensions:
(a)  Construct  the  matrix  representing  a  rotation  through  anglc  P  (counterclock- wise,  
looking  down  the  axis  toward  the origin)  about  the  z-axis.
(b)  Construct  the inalrix  representing  a rotation  by  120' (counterclockwise, look- ing  down  
the  axis) about  an  axis  thi'ough  the point  (1,1.1).
(c)  Construct  the  matrix  representing  reflection  through  the .ry-plane.
(d)  Check  that all these matrices are orthogonal,  and calculate  their determinants.
ro    e                  i      e  usu       asis                  con       c      e  na   i       
     cp ese   in•  a through  angle 6  about  the  J-axis.  Suppose  now  we change  bases,  to
—i“,   k'       k.  Construct  the  matrix  S   that  effects  this  change  of  basis,  and  check 
that  ST,   S*1 and ST,.S*'  are  what  you  would  expect.

Problem A.16  Show   that   similarity   preserves   matrix   multiplication  (that   is,  if A  B  
     C“   then  A   B   =  C   )  S     i a   ty doe           ln gene a1  p e  e   e sy       e ry


Section  A.S.•  Eigenvectors   iud Eigenvalues          449

reality, or hermiticity;  show, however,  that  if S  is uxiini3, and H“ is hermitian,  their H    
is hermitian.  Show  that S  carries an orthonormal  basis into another orthonoivial basis  if  and 
 only  if  it  is unitary.


+Problem  A.17  Prove   that   Tr(T  Ti)    =   Tr(T›Tt).   It   follows   immediately    that Tr(T 
 T,T3) =  Tr(T,T  Tl J.  but  is  it  the  case  that  Tr(T  T,T3)  =  Tr(T2T  T3),  in general? 
Prove  it, or disprove  it. Hiiii:  The  best  disproof  is always  a counterexain-



A.5  EIGENVECTORS  AND EIGENVALUES
Consider  the  linear  transformation  in  three-space  consisting  of  a  rotation,  about some 
specified  axis, by an angle 8,  Most  vectors  will change  in a rather complicated way (they ride 
around on a cone about  the axis), but  vectors that  happen  to lie along the  axis  have  very  
simple  behavior:  They  don't  change  at  all  [T  a)      |o)).  If 6  is 180”,  then  vectors  
which  lie in  the “equatorial”  plane  reverse  signs (T \a)       — |a)). In a complex  vector 
space'⁶ e›'ei     linear  transformation  has “special”  vectors  like these,  which  are  
transformed  into  scalar  multiples  of  themselves:

[A.69]

they  are  called  eigenvectors  of  the  transformation,  and  the  (complex)  number  X is  their 
 eigenvalue.  (The iiir//  vector  doesn't  count,  even  though  in a  trivial  sense it  obeys  
Equation  A.69  for  on;'  T  and  riii)   Z;   technically,  an  eigenvector  is  any ironzero  
vector satisfying  Equation  A.69.) Notice  that  any  (nonzero) rui/Ii/i/r  of an eigenvector  is 
still  an eigenvector,  with  the same  eigenvalue.
With   respect   to  a   particular   basis,   the   eigenvector   equation   assumes   the


Ta =  Xa,
A.70


(for  nonzero  a), or

(T — XI)a =  0.


[A.71]

(Here 0 is the zero matrix,  whose elements are all zero.) Now, if the matrix  (T — XI) had an  
im›ei se,  we could  multiply  both  sides of Equation  A.7 l  by  (T — XI)* ¹, and

'"This  is  tint  always  true  in  a  rvnl  vector  space  (where  the  scalars  are  rcstrictccl  
to  ical  values).
See  Problem  A.18.


eti             inerr     ge

conclude  that  a =  0. But  by  assumption  a is not  zero, so the matrix  (T — XI) must in  fact  
be singular,  which  means  that  its determinant  is zero:





Expansion  of  the determinant  yields  an  algebraic  equation  for X:



it   "  +          tt -   1    "      ' +       ’  ’  ’+          1    +
'     0-                                              [A.73)


called  the characteristic equation  for the matrix; its solutions  determine  the eigen- values.  
Notice  that  it's  an  xth-order  equation,  so  (by  the  fundamental  theorem of  algebra)  it  
has  it  (complex)  roots.'⁷  However,  some  of  these  may  be  multiple roots,  so  all  we  can 
 saY  for  certain  is  that  an  ii  x  r   matrix  has  at  lenst  othe  and t7f ??iOSr  ii  
distinct  eigenvalues.  The collection  of  all  the eigenvalues  of a matrlx  is

ono
ca  e      s  spe            ;  i    wo
e      ne     y   n  epen  en   e gen  ec ors         e     e
same  eigenvalue,  the  spectrum  is said  to  be  degenerate.
To  construct   the  e'igenvecr   i's   it  is  generally  easiest  simply   to  plug  each  X ac   
 into Equat  on  A 7    and  so ve      y    an       or     e co   ponents  o   a          s  ow 
you  how  it  goes  by  working  out  an  example.

Example  A.1    Find  the eigenvalues  and eigenvectors  of  the  following  matrix:
2       0     —2
—2i             2i                                                [A.74)

Solution:  The characteristic equation  is


—2i

2i         =   —X   +   (1 +   i)X    — iX  =  0.              [A.75)


and its roots are 0,  1, and i.  Call the components of the first eigenvector (o  , a„   o1); en
2       0    —2
—2i            2i         «z

!7Tf is here lhai  the case ufi rr.nI  vcclur snaccs hcc‹Jmes  murc  awkwaid.  bccausc  the 
characteristic equation  need  nut  have 3ny  (real)  .suluticns  al ‹th.  Sec Problem  A. I8.


Section  A. S:   Eigenvector s mid Eigenvalues           45 1
which  yields  three equations:





The first determines a3 (in terms of a '): n3
eigenvector  is still an eigenvector):





n  ; the second determines ri,: a,  =  0;


[A.76)

For  the  second  eigenvector  (recycling  the same  notation  for  the  components)  we have



which  leads  to the equations





with  the solution  rf3 =  (l/2)r*l.    i  =  [(1 — i)/2]• 1 •  this  time  I’11  pick «l  m 2, so


[A.77)







1      0
which  gives  the equations


452          Appendix    Linear  Algebra

whose  solution  is  c3  =  al   =  0,  with  e,   undetermined.  Choosing  o,   =   1,  we 
conclude

0
a"’         1         for  Xa  =  i.
0

[A.78]


If  the eigenvectors  span  the  space (as  they  do in  the  preceding  exmnple),  we are  free  
to  use  them  as a basis:





In  this  basis  the  matrix  representing  T   takes  on  a  very  simple  form,  with  the 
eigenvalues  strung out  along  the  main diagonal, and all other elements  zero:





0     0
and  the (normalized)  eigenvectors  are
[A.79]





[A,80J



A  matrix  that can  be brought  to diagonal form (Equation  A.79)  by a change nf  hasil  is  said 
 In  he  dingnnnliznhle  (evidently   a  matrix   is  diagnnali7ah1e  if  and only   if  its  
eigenvectors  span   the  space).  The  similarity   mati'ix   that  effects   the diagonalization  
can  be  constructed  by  using  the  normalized  eigenvectors  (in  the
old  basis) as  the columns  of S*  l:


Example A.2    In Example  A.1,




so (using  Equation  A.57)
0         2







0    0    0





There's an obvious advantage  in bringing a matrix  to diagonal  fonn: It's much

eigenvectors  have  to  span  the  space.  If  the  characteristic  equation  has  ii  distinct 
roots,  then the matrix  is certainly  diagonalizable, but it  trial  be diagonalizable even

see  Problem  A.19.)  It  would  be  handy  to  know  in  advance  (before  working  out all  the  
eigenvectors)  whether  a  given  matrix  is  diagonalizable.  A  useful  sufficient (though  not  
necessary)  condition  is  the  following.  A  matrix  is said  to  be  normal

nozmaJ :   [N', Nt      0.                                         [A.82]
ve       o                        s     ngo       zn   e     s e gen  ectors span  t  e . pace .   
n  p      c ular, every  hermitian  matrix,  and  every  unitary  matrix,  is diagonalizable.
Suppose  we  have  who  diagonalizable  matrices;  in  quantum  applications  the question  often  
arises:  Can  they   be  simultaneously  diagonalized  (by   the  s‹vne

hotli   diap•onal?  The  answer  is  yes  i[ cmd  onl›  if  the  nvo  innlrices  commute  (see 
Problem  A.22).

sProblem  A.18  The 2  x 2 matrix  representing  a  rotation  of  the .vy  plane  is
cos 8     — sin 6
sin 6       cos 6
Show  thai  (except  for  certain  special  angles—what  are  they?)  this  matrix  has  no real  
eigenvalues.  (This  reflects  the  geometrical   fact   that  no  vector  in  the  plane


454        Appendix    Litre ir Algebra

is carried  into itself  under such  a  rotation; contrast  rotations  in three  dimensions.) This 
matrix does, however, have ‹’omyle.v  eigenvalues and eigenvectors. Find them. Construct  a  matrix 
 S   that  diagonalized  T.  Pcrforin  the  similarity  transformation (STS* ¹) explicitly.  and  
show  thai  it  reduces T to diagonal  foi‘in.

Problem  A.t9  Find  the eigenvalues  and eigenvectors  of  the following  matrix:



Can  this  matrix  be diagonalized?


Problem  A.20  Show that the first, second. and last coefficients in the characteristic equation  
(Equation  A.73)  are:


C„ —— (— l)”.     C„     =  (—1)“*' Tr(T).     and     C-0
For a 3 x 3 matrix  with elements  T;;, what  is C ’?
det(T).            [A.84)


Problem  A.21  It’s  obvious  that  the  trace  of  a ‹lin¿oiicil   matrix  is  the sum  of  its 
eigenvalues,  and  its  deterlTlinant  is  their  product  (just  look  at  Equation  A.79).  It 
follows (from Equations  A.65 and A.68) that the same holds for any ‹lia¿‹›iinlipal le matrix.  
Prove  that in fact

[A.85)
for rtny  matiix. (The  X's are the  ri  solutions  to the characteristic equation—in  the case of  
multiple  roots,  there  may  be fewer  linearly  independent  eigenveriorx  than there  are  
solutions,  but  we  still  count  each  X  as  many  tilnes  as  it  occurs.)  f/iiir.



and  use  the  result  of  Problem  A.20.

Problem A.22
(a)  Show  that  if  two  matrices  commute  in  one  basis, then  they  coiniiiute  in  any basis. 
That  is:

[Tt. Ttt -  0       [Tt. T/t -  0.
Hiiit:  Use Equation  A.64.
[A.86]

Section  A.6:  Hertnitinn Tr itis[ornuitioiis         45.5

(b)   Show    that    if    two    matrices    are   simultaneously    diagonalizable,    they 
commute."


l•rob1em  A.23  Consider  the  matrix
1     1
1     i
(aj   is  ii  normai''
(b)   Is it  diagonalizable?



A.6  HERMITIAN TRANSFORMATIONS
Hi  Equation  A.48  I  defined  the  heriiiitian  conjugate  (or  "adjoint")  of  a  inati‘ix   us 
its  transpose-conjugate:  T°  —  T   .  Now  I  want  to  give  you  a  lnore  fundamental 
definition  for  the  hcrnutian  conjugate  of  a  liiieni   ti ‹msfoi runtime:  It  is  that  
trans- fonnation  T    which,  when  applied  to  the  fii st  member  of  an  inner  product,  
gives the  same  result  as  if  T  itself  had  been  applied  to  the  see mid  vector:
(T '' a   §)         (a  T|3),                                         [A.87]
(for  all  vectors  |‹r)  and  |Q) ).l’  I have  to warn  you  that  although  everybody  uses  it, 
this  is  lousy  notation.  For  e  and Q  are  not  vector s  (the  i sectors  are  |e)  and  
|Q)), they  are  tuwies.  In  particular,  they  are  endowed  with  no  mathematical  properties 
at  all,  and  the expression "TJ"  is  literally  iir›ii.rem.se:  Linear  transformations act  on 
i!ectoi s,  not  lnpels.  But  it  s  pretty  cleai  what  the  notation  itfeaiis!  TJ   is  the  
name of  the  vector  T  §),  and  (T ' a   |3 1  is  the  inner product  of  the  vector  F'  |a)  
with  the vector  |Q).  Notice  in  particular  that




whereas


for any scalar  r.
[A.88]


[A.89]


'“Provine  tlJc ccnvci se (th:u  il” I\vo diagonalizable iJJatrices con\nJutc  then Lhey are sin›u 
It.ineousIy Jia¿uc›nalizablc)  is  not  so  simple.  Sec  lor  cx:\nJpIc  hugcn  Mci-zbachci.  
///‹m/Hm  M‹’c-ltciiii‹-s.  litl  cd.. Wiley.  New  Yci k  ( I t98), Scctiun  1.0.4.
''  You  iiiay  w'onder  whether  such  a  tr‹inslol ination  neces.sal ily  exlsts. Loi›‹l 
qiicstit›n!  llie an.swci iS  "Yes."  Sec,  for  instance.  P.  R.  Halmo.s,  Fiiiit‹•  Dim 
cii.‹i‹›itnl  Vat t‹›t   S;› i‹'c. ,  2nd  eel..  van  Nostrand. Prilicct‹›li  ( I 95h).  Seetioli  
44.


ppeii            itieor     ge

If you're working in an orthonormal  basis (as we always shall), the hermitian conjugate  of  a 
linear  transformation  is represented  by  the  hermitian  conjugate  of


(a TQ   =  a'Tb = (T  a)†b =  (T†a\Q).                       [A.90]


In  quantum  mechanics,  a fundamental  role is played  by hermitian  transfor- mations (T!'  —— 
T).    The eigenvectors and eigenvalues ot a hermitian transformation


1.  The eigenvalues  of a hermitian  transformation are real.
Proof:  Let  X  be an eigenvalue  of  T: T  a) —— X a),    with |a)      |0). Then



Meanwhile,  if  T  is hermitian,  then



But  (e|a)     0 (Equation  A.20), so X =   X*, and  hence X  is real.    QED

eigenvalues  are orthogonal.
Proof:  Suppose  T  a       L\a   and  T |3   =     |$), with X     ¿z. Then

Ia|”g) —— l•!»B) —— r(•!B)

and  if T  is hermitian,




But Z =  X*   from 1    and X               assuin          so                        ED
3.  The eigenvectors  of a hermitian  transformation span the space.
As we have seen, this is equivalent  to the statement that any hermitian lTlatrix can  be 
diagolialized  (see  Equation  A.82). ’1’his  rather  technical  fact  is, in  a

It turns out to be a thinner reed than one might have hoped, because the proof does  not carry  
over to infinite-dimensional vector spaces.


Section  A. 6:  Hernsitiaii  Tratis[orrnntiuris          45.7



for all  vectors  |e)  and  |Q).  Prove  that  it  is (surprisinp•1y)  sufficient  that  (     T    
1  = (Ty |y)  for  all  vectors  | y).  ffiiir:  First  let  |y}  =   |o) -1- |Q},  and  then  let  
|y)  =

sProblem  A.25  Let


(a)   Verify  that  T is hermitian.
(b)   Find  its eigenvalues  (note  that  they  are real).
(c)   Find  and  normalize  the eigenvectors  (note  that  they  are orthogonal).
(d)   Construct   the  unitary   diagonalizing   matrix  S,   and  check  explicitly   thal  it


ized  form.

+Problem  A.26  Consider  the following  hermitian  matrix:




(a)   Calculate  det(T)  and Tr(T).
Find  the  eigenvalues  of        Check  that  the     su      and  p oduc    are  consis

version  of T.
(c)   Find  the eigenvectors  of  T.  Within  the  degenerate  sector,  constrict  two  lin- early  
independent  eigenvectors  (it  is  this  step  that  is  always  possible  for  a liei‘tnitiaii  
matrix,  but  not  for an at hiti‘cit;   matrix—contrast  Problem  A.19). Orthop•ona1ize   them,   
and   check   that   both   are   orthogonal   to   the   third. Normalize  all  three 
eigenvectors.
(d)   Construct  the  unitary  matrix  S   that  diagonalizes  T,  and  show  explicitly  that the  
similarity  transformation  using  S   reduces  T  to  the  appropriate  diagonal


Problem  A.27   A unitni    tran.iforniatioii  is one for  which  U“' II       1.
(a)   Show  that  unitary  transformations preserve  inner products,  in  the  sense  that
Ua   U§        (a  §   , for all  vectors  |e),  |§).


45 8          Appendix     Linear  Algebra

(b)   Show  that  the elgenvalues  of  a unitary  transformation  have  modulus  1.
(c)   Show  that  the  eigenvectors  of  a unitary  transformation  be1onp•ing  to distinct 
eigenvalues  are orthogonal.

s  s  sProblem  A.28  Functions  of matrices are defined by their Taylor series expansions; for 
example,




(a)   Find  exp(M), if

0    1    3                                 0

(i)  M  =      0    0    4    ;      (ii)  M  =
0    0    0

(b)   Show  that  if M  is diagonalizable, then
det (eM   =  eT"“’.
—8     0)





[A.92]

Comment:   This  is  actually   ti ue  even  if  M   is  not   diagonalizable,  but  it's harder  
to prove  in  the  general  case.
(c)   Show  that  if  the  matrices  M  and  N  roi7Triiire,  then

[A.93]

Prove (with the simplest counterexample you can think up) that Equation  A.93 is not  true, in 
general, for non -commuting inatñces.
(d)   If  H  is hermitian,  show  that  e'‘H  is unitary,








INDEX












21-centimeter  line. 285



absorption.  .348—35l,  365

adiabatic  approximation,  368-393
adiabatic  process,  368 —371
adiabatic  series.  .393
adiabatic  theorem,  368 —376
adjoint,  98,  444
agnostic,  4. 420
Aharonov-Bohm  effect,  384—391
Airy  function,  327—330
Airy‘s  equation,  327
allowed  energy.  27-28,  227 —228
bands,  227—228
bouncing  ball. 333
delta-function  well,  73
finite  square  well,  80—81
;ji•m‹xn i‹•     <ei I Itji ‹  e   d6,   Jd,     i nn     a 9n
helium  atom,  212-214
hydrogen  atom,  145—146,   149,  274-275,  336
infinite  cubical  well,  135,  218—220.  262—263
infinite  spherical  well,  141 — 144
infinite  square  well.  32 potenll ill   Wel 1,  1  1 •9,  I  IU  —I J£ power-law  potential,  335
allowed  transition,  362,  366-367
alpha
decay,  322—324
particle.  322—325
amplitude.  scattering,  .399
angular  equation,  135 — 140.  169
angular  momentum,  160— 171
addition,  184—189
commutation  relation,  161. 166—167.  171
conservation,  167
eigenliinctions. 167— 17 l
eigenvalues.  160— 167
intrinsic.  171
orbital   171
spin,  171—190
anomalous  magnetic  moment,  273 antibonding,  210
anti-hermitian  matrix, W and-hermitian  operator,  124
aniisymmetric  matrix. 443
Aspect,  A., 426
associaieu  Laguerre  poiynomiai,  ioz— i o
associated  Legendre  function,  136.  138,  196
atoms,  210—218

over  directions,  353-354
over polarizations.  353—354
value.  7—8
.iximutla.if   ‹angle   1 54   13iS    1 5fl
azimuthal  quantum  number,  139



warmer  series,  ins
band  structure. 224—229
baryon.  189
basis,  437. 446—449
bead on a ring. 87, 99. 260—261,  386—387
Bell. John, 4. 423
Bell's inequality,  425—426
Bell's  theorem,  423—428
Berry,  Michael,  380

460         hidex


Berry’.s  phase.  376 —391

binding  energy.  15.1.  203
binomial  coe1‘ficieni.  234 Biot-Saval t  ltnv.  27.1
DI ilCK DOtty  S}9eCtru iT1.  Z9J     -J4D.  JOD
Bloch.  Felix,  2

Bohm.  David. 4. 421. 423—424
Bohr.  Niels. 4.  1.1.2
Bohr  energies.  150. 267. 269 Both  1ol‘icula.  l5f)
Bohr  lTliltflC OU,  278—279
Both’ l‘iidius,  130,  269
Buhzmann cunsl:‹nt.  2.1. 210
Br›lizni:Inn  lfictor,  355 —356
hnndin o   ? 10
Boi ii  approximation.  .399.  408-418
Born-Oppenheinier  approximation. .369
Born  serics.  416—418
Boi n  statistical  interpi ct.it ion.  *—5 Bose  conflcnsation. 243

houncilaz hal) ñ93
bound:u)  conditions.  31. 48.  71 —72
delia-function  well,  71 —73 finite  square  xvell,  79—8 l
bound  states. 65-69. 71-7.3 degenerate.  g7
finite  square  well. 79—8 1 variational  principle  lor.  299—3
bra.  122
Buffon's  needle.  21  bulk  rrio‹1ulus.  223—224



canonical  coinlnutation  i elation,  43.  1.3.3
cant›nical  momentum.  200
c•it  pM•idox,  430—4.31
C‹iucliy’s  integral  forniul‹i.  410 causal  influence.  427—428
t. All   111 l'Llgctt   I t•1 11 I,     1 -I   I
Chambers,  R.  G.,   389 Chandi  isckhar.  S..   31 2—313
Chandi'asckhar  limit.  247
cliiiractcl4stic cquati‹in.  450.  454 chemical  potentiiil,  24 l
classlcal  elcctron  i-adius.  172 classical  region,  316—32().  325 —32h
classic;il  scattcrine  theory.  -394—.397.  41 6—417 classical  velocity.  60.  64—6h
Clebscli-Goidan  coefficients.  187— 189.  194 cuct”hcicnts
Clcbsch-Goid‹in.  187 — 189.  194
reflection.  75
transmission.  75


coiiici‹1ent  spectr‹tl  lines,  I ^)3 “coltl”  solid.  221. 223
c‹illapse. 5. 106.  l76— 177,  420—422.  428—429.  4.31. 433

commutator.  4.3.  1.1.2
iingulal’  momentum.   161 — 162.    l'97— I'98.  ?.76.  .360—362
canonical.  43.  133
matrix.  4
uncertainty  principle  tiled.  1.1.1 — 1.1.2
commuting  operators.  42—4.3.  133
conipaiihle  tibservables.  1.1.1 — 1.1 fi
coniplciTlentarity.  420—42 I coiiiplcte  iniier  product  space. '34 completeness

ot’ functions.  .33 -36, 95-96
v I I lilbert  space, 94
of *l<ARtt1ITl Ricchanics.  3 complete  eel  ml’  vectors.  437 componcnt.  4.37

coiifigurat ion.  2 16—2 17.  2.3 1
cooJug‹ite,  443—
connection  formula.s.  325-335 conservation
ot‘ angular  iiioiiielitulii.  167 ol’ ener•py.  37.  118
ot’ probability.  22.  19.1
conscrvativc  system,  1
continuity  equation.  191
continuous  spectra.  100— 101,  103 — 106
continuous  variables.  9— 1.2
contour  intcp•r:il.  410—41 2
Copenhagen  interpretation,  4 Coulomb  bal i icr,  32-2—323
Coulomb  potential.  145.  152 — 153.  211.  214.  400.  415
Coulomb  repulsion.  322— 323
cotalent  bun0.  209—2 10 critical  tcmpcratul c, 243 cross  product.  438—440
cross-section.  .396—398 crysiai.  zzo.  zvu
cubic  symmetry,  290
cyclotrt›n  m‹›tion.  198



Dui u'in  tel m,  274
de  Broglie  ftil mul:i.  19. 60. 104
dc  Broglie  wavelength,  19.  23
dec‹iy  modes,  337 —359 dccohcrcnce   dcl dep°cncriicy
electron.  205 —206
highcr-nrdci', 261 —266

Index        461










t)      104























76



















cI'fcctive  nuclear charge, .301-302 cffcctivc  potential,  1J0— l4l
exchange  forcc.  207—?- 10
exchange  intcgi.il.  307
cxchangc  operator,  205





cxcitcd  states. 32                                                                              
Gamow's  lhcory  tel’ ‹ilpha decay. 32.2—324 helium. 212—214                                        
                                  gap.  227 —228
infi nitc squ‹ire  well, 32                                                                 g‹iugc  
in variance.  200
t                                                                                                   
            °         n
exclusion  pl inciplc,  204.  214.  218. 221. 22h                                    gaussian,  12. 
68. 77. 113.  294-298. .310
x   i   a        285                                                                               
g    ss   n      vc  p     c   67    6  1  3  1.0
cxpcctation  value,  7. 15 — 16                                                             
gcncralizcd  l'unction.  70
Ehrcnle.st’s  thcorcrn.  18                                                                
generalized  statistical  ilitcrprctation.  I tl6—109 gcneriilized  statistical  interpretation.  
107 — 108                              generalized  uncert‹iinty  principle.  I 10— 1.1.3

ilfTflonic  ‹iscillatur   30                                                                 
ecncrat‹ir  nf r‹itations.  l9fi— 197
stutionaly  .s’tatcs. 2h                                                                      
generator  of  translations  in  sp‹icc. 129— 1.30
nrno  rIr•riu:it ivr•   1.15 — 1.1.6                                                                
        generator  ‹if’ translations  in  time   I >9— 130
extended  uncertainly  principle,  1?8                                                  geometric  
phase, 379—384,  390



electron.  273. 283


























frcc e1c«ti'un  density. 22.1.  228

l‘ree  particlc. 59—67,  116—118

fundamental  (./‘).  215

1‘undarnental  theorem  ct‘ algebra.  450 on




hall’-integer  angular  momentum,  165,  169,  197 — 198,  203
ia       e, 359
Hamiltonian.  26—27. 42
discrete and  continuous  spectra.  105 — 106 hclium. 212—214

Hankel  function,  401


























445
hidden  variable,  3—4,  423-42-4
Hilbert  space,  93-96.  10-1,  119
hole.  ?29
Hooke's  law,  40

hydrogen  atom,  145— 160

binding  energy.  15.1

ground  state,  150— 151                                                                    ¿q
ypc    n   s         re                                                                             
          c     gy   17.267     71

203.
i-udial  wave function,  146— 157
radius,  l49— 151
spectrum,  157- 160
Stark  effect   289—290,  297-298
wave  functions,  152,  154

hydrogenic  atom,  158— 159
hydrogen  ion  (H*),  303-3       ,  31.2 —31 -3
hydrogen  molecule.  209—210 hydrogen  molecule  ion,  304—309 hyperfine  splitting.  267,  28.3 
—285





identical  particles.  2(I 1 —248

statistical  mechanics,  230—245
two-pal ticle systems.  201 —210
Kramers'  reliiliun.  288 —289
Kronecker  delta,  33—34
Kronig-Penncy  model.  226-227




ladder operate»‘s.  42.      —43.  I 62— lH.    168— 169 Lagl tinge  multiplier.  236—237
La•puerrc  polynoniiiil.  152-153
Lms  Wft.267
I.andau  ie.vet.s.  198
L‹inde  t-litctor.  278
Laplaei:in.  132
Lainiol  li›rlnula.  358—339 Larmol  prcccss ion.  179 LCAO  lcchniqtic.  305
Legendre  polynoiniiil.  124.  I 36— 1.37
Levi-Civita  symbol.  177


464        Index


lifetime. 88. 116— 117, 324—325
excited  state. 357—359
lifting dcgcneracy,  265
linear algcbra. 93 —94, 4.35—458
changing  bases. 446—449
eigenvectors  and eigenvalues.  449—458 inner ornducts. 4.38—440
matrices. 44.1 —446
vectors. 433—438













magnetic  dipulc
anomalous  moment.  273
energy  of. 179. 271
fiorcc on. 181 — 183
moment,  178— 179. 272—275
transition,  366—367
iiiagnctic  field,  271 —272,  349 niaenetic  fitlx. 380—3h2,  385—391 magnetic  quantum  nuinbcr.  
1.39 magnetic  resoniincc.  365 —36h Mandclstani-Tanim  formulation.  116
mimy  u'orlds  interpretation. 4. 433
matrix.  94. 441-446
ch:iractcristic equation. 450
column. 443 conjugate.  443—W dctcrminant,  445
diagonal  form. 452—453
eigenvectors  and eigenvalues.  449—455
men
function  of, 458
hermitian  con.iugatc (ad,joilit). 444 hermitian  transformation, 455—4.58 imaginary. M
orthogonal.  445
real, 444
row. 443
similar. U7—U8
simultaneously diagonalized.  453
singuliir.  445
<t-ew  hermitian   d4d
spectrum.  450
spin,  173 — 174,  195
transpose. 443


zcro. 449
Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution,  241
Maxwell's equations.  385
mcan  value,  7—9
measurement,  2—5.  36—37
cat paradox. 430—431
destructive.  428—430

25







momentum.  15— 18
angular,  160— 171
.U1OR  Cil
dc  Broglie  formula,  19, 23
eigenfunctions/eigenvalues. 103- 104
operator,  17 — 18,  42, 97—98,  103,  132
transfer,  414
moinentuiri  space  wavc  function.  108— 109,  191 —192
most  probable  configuration. 7. 236—239
muon. 313
muon  catalysis, .313
muonic  hyclrogen,  203,  283
niuonium.  285

N
Neumann  function.  142— 144.  401

neutron  star.  247
no-clone  theorem,  428—430
nodc.  33
nomenclature,  atomic.  215—2 16 non  cgencr   c  per ur      on     eory nonholonomic  process,  
376—378
nonlt›cality.  426—428
non-normalizable  fulietion.  13.  60. 68
normal  matrix,  453
normalization.  12— 15,  37,  95
free  particle.  60
harmonic  oscillator.  46—49
hydrogen.  152
.spherical  cooi dinatcs.  138— 139
two-particle  systclns.  201,  206 viiri:itiunal  principle   *93—*99 vector,  439
wave  function.  13— 15 norm  ol’ a  vector.  4.39




nuclear  lifetime. 324—325
nucl«    m:ignctic  resonance,  366 nuclcar  motion.  202—203,  211




obscrvablcs.  96— 100,  102
determinate  states,  98- 100
hermitian  operators,  96—98
incompatible,  11 I —112
obscrver. 5. 431 occupation  number.  23 l

operator,  17
anti-hermitian,  124
commuting.  42
exchange.  205
Hanâillonian,  27
hcrlnitian,  96—98
identity.  123
ladder,  42, M—45,  162— 164,  168— 169
incar,
lowering,  44—46,  162.  168— 169
momentum.  17—18,  42
osition,  17.  104— 105
projection.  1 23
r:rising.  44—46,  162
optical  theorem,  419
orbi(ilJ,  2 14
orbital  angular  momcntum,  17 l orthodox  position   3—4  4>.0—4>>
orthogonality, 33
cigcnf'unctions.  10 l — 102
tunctions.  95
partial  wave analysis. 399—408 Paschen-Back  effect,  279
Paschcn  series,  158




perturbation  theory ftrst ordcr,  250—25 1
time-dependent. 340—367
time-independent, 249—292 phase
Berry's,  380

geometric.  379
wave  function,  18,  26. 32, 39. 200. 380
phase shift. 405 —408 p  ase  ve o  i   .
photon,  158,  243 —244,  350, 356
Plancherel's  theorem,  61, 66—67.  77,  l Art
Planck  formula,  158. 243—244,  285
Planck's  blackbody  formula,  244—245,  355 —356

polar anglc,  150— 151
polarization. 348,  353 population  inversion,  _35 l

eigenfunctions/eigenvalues,  l0J— 105
gcncriilizcd  stutisrical  interpretation.  108— 109
operator.  17
position-momentum  uncertainty  principle.  1 I 1— 113 position  space wavc  function,  108
posltronium,  203. 285
potential,  24
chemical.  241
hydrogen  wave functions,  ls3                                                          
delta-lunction, 68—78
spherical  harmonics.  153                                                                  
OlTcctivc.  140 — 141
vcctol s. 43a                                                                                      
finite square  well. 78—84
orthogonal  matrix.  44s                                                                            
       infinite  square  well.  30—31
orthohclium,  213                                                                                   
          Kronig-Pcnncy, 227
r          r   a    y                                                                               
                   re  cc     n   ss
Dirac,  105.  123                                                                                   
        scalar,  384
eigenfunctions.  103                                                                                
    spherically  symmetrical.  415
lulictions,  95                                                                                     
           step,  83—84
vectors,  439                                                                                       
           vector.  198—200
orthonormal  set, 4.39                                                                              
         Yukawa.  310. 415
onhorholTlbiC  Syrr1lTlC1f\.  290                                                                   
                 ptytpptj¿t|  Wt2H
ovci‘lap  intcgl at. .306                                                                           
            no  vertical  walls,  .3-32—333
one  vertical  wall,  330-331

pow'er  law  potential,  335

parilhclium, *13                                                                                
princip‹il  (p).  215

pip
par  a   wavc a
p    q             nu       r


466          Index



nor
probability, .5 — 12                                                                              
resonance  curve. 366
r   s s     s  «a    n crprc a
conselvation,  22.  l9l                                                                     Riemann 
 zeta  function.  38. 243
continut›us  variables, '9— 12                                                           rigged  
Hilbert  spiice.  104
current.  21. 66.  191                                                                       rigid  
rotc›r.  170
UR                     si y    0                                                                    
                     d        s     r   ul    57    36   137
discrete  variables.  5—9                                                                  rotating 
 wave approximation. 348
gcnei'alized  statistical  interpretation.  106— 109                              row  matrix. 443
reflection. 75                                                                                 
Rutherford  scattering,  397. 415—416
tr:tnsilion,  346—.348                                                                       
Rydber_• cOlâSlitlJl.  156
transniissi‹in  75                                                                            
Rvdber•  lormula,  158
projection  ‹iperittor.  122— 123
nrcip:ig‹it@    41 S
proton

magnetic  lield. 271                                                                       scalar  
multiplication. 436—437
scaliir  potential,  384

Esc                                                      e  9

qu:ilituiii  dots,  313 —314
quantum  dynamics.  340—.341
quantum  electrodynaniics. 273. 350—352

quitntum  number.  139.  142

itZilTlUf hd.I.  1.39
“good.” 270, 277—279
in:tgnctic,  1.39
an  le. 3'34—3'36
Bonn  approximation. J08 —418

low energy, 414

partial  wnve  analysis.  399—405 phase sliilis. 40.5—408
Rutherford. .397,  415—416
by                                                                                                  
                                     cr
qu‹intum  statics. 340—.341                                                                     
Yukawa.  415
be                                                                                                  
                                                6    6    73   76    0     1
431 —434                                                             finite squai'e  well. 81 —84

H.ll’k,  1.89
tunnclin  , .12.0—325
Sclii'odinger  equittion.  1—2,  131— U2

by                                                                                                  
                                       ge    1.5
integral  li›riii  408 —412
Rabi  flopping  lrcqucncy.  347 —348,  353                                               inonicntum 
spauc. 130
1.idial  ivitvc  functioli,  133— 134.  140— 141.  146— 157                               
.sphcrical  cc›ordinatcs.  131 — 145
radiation,  348—354                                                                                 
         time-dcpcnclcnt.  1 —3,  13,  24—26.  28,  147— 149. 2tl 1 —248
fil  iittion  x‹ine.  400                                                                           
               time-indcpcndclit.  25—26,  132.  147.  202.  330
t‹idiu.s                                                                                            
                     WKB  approximation. 3.15 —.33°9
Bohr.  150.  269                                                                                    
    Schriidinger  picture.  130

egg
ass
raising  operator.  44—45.  162.  168— l6'3                                                  
Schwarz  inequality.  90.  11.3.  440
Rainsauer-Townsend effect, 82                                                         screcnine.  
215
R,   i  i  h ›  r  rrnuia,  403                                                                   
sech-squared  potential. 89—90. .3.35
lealist  position.  3—4,  176. 420—422                                                 sccond-ordcr 
 corl cction,  230—251.  25.5 —257.  299, 344—.34.5
rccursion  formula, .5.3—55.  148.  150                                                 selection  
rules. .359—.363
l'educed  mass. 20*                                                                            
5C$f-ildjoint  m‹itrices. 44-1
1 cllected  wave. 74—75                                                                      
scrniconduct‹ii . 229
leflection  coeflicient,  75                                                                   
separable  solution,  24—2°9. 60—65
retlectionlcss potent ial. 90                                                                
separation  o1’ variables.  24—25.  13.3 — 135
relativistic cor rection.  2J7. 267 —271                                                sharp  t.v 
). 214—215


Index        467




nnp        rnz‹       ‹ xcill‹  ur cquafiun

singlet  state.  185 — 186.  194,  210.  284—285.  422

sinusoidal  pcrturbation.  .346—.348

finite,  78—84

standard  deviation,  8-9
Stark eflect.  289—291.  338—339
slationaly  state.s.  24—30

free  particle. 60

skew-hcrinitian  matrix,  44J                                                                     
infinite .square  well.  3tl—32
sLew-hermitian operator.  1.24                                                                   
virial  ilieorein.  126
Slater deterlBiiiiint. 210                                                                        
statistical  interpretation. 2—5.  l06— 109
xis             :                                                                                   
                                       e         c
soft-sphere  sc‹ittering. 414                                                                   
statistics,  spin  and,  204 nd       s
solids. *3. 2 I 8—22.9                                                                              
slcp  l”unctiuil.  77. 297
bilRd  Sllvcture.  224—229                                                                          
 Stern-Gel lach  experiiiient.  181 — 183
l'rec  elcctron  tas,  219—224                                                                      
 stimulated  cliiission,  350—352
SolT1rnDl*l?ld.   A. •  2.18                                                                        
                                    Sri I’m 1 HQ’S  il    âfoh il  Ii2(lon•  2.37— 238
an     37                                                                                           
                   er es. 2
specti if  decomposition. 124                                                                
Sudarshan.  E.C. G.. U2


blackbody,  2J3 —245

degcnerate.  99. 450


spherical  coordinates,  133— 145

i-adial  equation,  140— 145
.spherical  Hankel  I"uncli‹Jn,  401 sphcrical  Neumann  lunction.  142— 144
spherically  synJnJcti ic‹ll  putcntial.  I 3ñ. 413
spin.  17.1 — 190
doc   ,  173
erllétR     Cd  S[ét(CS.     22  —423
exchange  forces.  210
matrix,  173— 174.  179,  195
unc.  I78.  187







97
supcrluinin«l  influcncc.  427—428

symmctl‘iC  lTlill fiX,  M3

symrrlctry

urthui l1u‹Tibic.  29t)




Taylor  series. 41. 458
Taylor's  theorem,  52
temperaturc,  2.30.  240 tttragona symmttly. thermal  cncrgy.  222
hermal  equilibrium.  2.30.  232,  236—23
Thomas  preccssion,  273
ime-dependent  perturbation  theoq•,  341)—367 Golden  Rule. .354




SClCCtiOll  l’ulCS.  359 — 361                                                                      
                        t frills kCil’lTlilt iofl,
usq      e        #  a                            ncle
square     ell                                                                                      
                       lineai‘.  93,  455
double.  87—88                                                                                      
            unitary,  457-458




tr‹insition.  157— 158. 340—341
allowed,  366—367
forbiddcn,  362. 366—367



insposc
triangle  inequality,  440
triplct  statc.  185,  284—285
tunncling.  68.  76.  320—325
in  the  Stal k cflect,  .338—339
IUFDIfIQ     f3If11S.  68.  31 6—317.  325-.326.  332-333
two-iold  degeneracy.  257—261




uncertainty  principle.  18-20.  110- 118.  1.3.3
energy-time.  114— 118
extended.  1.28
generalized.  110— 113
minimum-uncertainty  wave  p‹ickct.  11.3 unitai y  matrix, 445,     8
unit  matrix. 444—445
unit  vector, 439
unst‹ib1e  pai'liclc.  22
group. 64
phase. 64
vertcx  factor. 418



wag  the doe  nietl«›d. 54      . 92 wavc  l'unction,  1 -5.    l 2— 14
collapse.  5,  106. 176— 177. 420-421.  428-429,  433
free  particle. 60—65
hydrogen,  1fi2— 156 infinite  qquare  well. 32 trio tie   um  space norlnalization,  12— 15
posititin  space,  11)8
radial,  133— 1.34,  140 — 141.  146— 157
.statistical  intcrpretati‹in,  2—5,  106— 109
trial,  312—313
of  unstable  particle.  22 wavelength.  18— 19.  l5h
wave  number.  398
wave  paekc.t   61 —66
gaussian,  67.  86,  1.13.  1.30
minimum-uncertainty,  113
wave-particle  duality,  420
••.•  ve    x'oc'tixr    ISO      d I d
white dwarf’,  246
Wren  displacement  law.  2M
Wigner.  Eugene. 3, 4.31
W KB  approximation. 315 —339
VillCRCn  ClCCffOn.  218                                                                            
 classical”  reg ion,  316—320

variables                                                                                           
    tunneling. .320 —.32.5
continu‹ius.    - 1*                                                                          
Wootters.  William.  42'9
discrete. 5—9

separation  of. 24—25.  1.33 — US
v‹iriancc.  9

variational  principle.  293 —314 helium  ground  iit‹l(C.  299—304 hydrogen  molecule  ion. 
3t)4—309
vector. 9.3. 435 —438
chaneing  hascs,      6-      9
Diriic  notation.  118— 119

zcro.  436
vector  potential.   l9S —200
vector space,  435
velocity.  16
el.issical.  60. 64—66
Yukawa  potential. .310. 415 —416
Yukawa  scattering. 415 —416



Zcemali  cffcct.  277—283

strong-field.  279-280
wc'ak-field.  277—279
Zeno cl fccl. 4.31 —4.34
zero  m         449
Zurek.  W. H.  42*9






at  ematica   Formu as



Trigonometry:



Law  of cosines:







Exponential  integrals:

sin(‹i      b) --  sin a oo8 b      cos a sin b
cos(n  ñ  b) — cos e cos b     sin o sin b

C2        62 —{— /22 — 2ob cos 8



x co$(ax) dx            cos(as) -l-  — sin(na)


z"e   ‘"     dx  =  ii ! a”
0


(2/›)!







dx
